602

PRACTICE GUIDELINES

nature publishing group

CME

Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/ajg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWn
YQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE= on 12/17/2024

ACG Clinical Guideline: Diagnosis, Treatment, and
Prevention of Acute Diarrheal Infections in Adults
Mark S. Riddle, MD, DrPH1, Herbert L. DuPont, MD2 and Bradley A. Connor, MD3

Acute diarrheal infections are a common health problem globally and among both individuals in the United States
and traveling to developing world countries. Multiple modalities including antibiotic and non-antibiotic therapies
have been used to address these common infections. Information on treatment, prevention, diagnostics, and the
consequences of acute diarrhea infection has emerged and helps to inform clinical management. In this ACG Clinical
Guideline, the authors present an evidence-based approach to diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of acute diarrhea
infection in both US-based and travel settings.
Am J Gastroenterol 2016; 111:602–622; doi:10.1038/ajg.2016.126; published online 12 April 2016

INTRODUCTION
Acute diarrheal infection is a leading cause of outpatient visits,
hospitalizations, and lost quality of life occurring in both domestic settings and among those traveling abroad. The Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention has estimated 47.8 million cases
occurring annually in the United States, at an estimated cost
upwards of US$150 million to the health-care economy (1,2).
Acute diarrhea can be defined as the passage of a greater number
of stools of decreased form from the normal lasting <14 days.
Some definitions require an individual to present with an abrupt
onset 3 or more loose or liquid stools above baseline in a 24-h
period to meet the criteria of acute diarrhea. Persistent diarrhea
is typically defined as diarrhea lasting between 14 and 30 days,
with chronic diarrhea generally considered as diarrheal symptoms
lasting for greater than a month. Acute diarrhea of infectious etiology is generally associated with other clinical features suggesting enteric involvement including nausea, vomiting, abdominal
pain and cramps, bloating, flatulence, fever, passage of bloody
stools, tenesmus, and fecal urgency. Acute diarrheal infection is
also often referred to as gastroenteritis, and some acute gastrointestinal infections may cause a vomiting predominant illness
with little or no diarrhea.
This guideline provides recommendations for the diagnosis,
management, and prevention of acute gastrointestinal infection focusing primarily on immune-competent adult individuals
and does not consider Clostridium difficile-associated infections,
which has recently been reviewed in a separate American College
of Gastroenterology (ACG) Clinical Guideline (3). It replaces a
previously published ACG Guideline on the same topic (4), and

supplements previously published Infectious Disease Society of
America (IDSA) (5), and World Gastroenterology Organization guidelines (6). This guideline is structured into five sections
of clinical focus to include epidemiology and population health,
diagnosis, treatment of acute disease, evaluation of persisting
symptoms, and prevention. To support the guideline development,
a comprehensive literature search on acute diarrheal infection in
adults was performed across multiple databases. A medical library
information specialist searched the Ovid MEDLINE and EMBASE
databases for relevant articles on 18 February 2015, using the following main terms (with synonyms and closely related words):
“diarrhea” AND “acute disease,” “infectious diarrhea”, “dysentery,”
or “acute gastroenteritis.” The searches were limited to English
language articles published in the past 10 years and excluded
case reports, and child or animal studies. Details of the search
methodologies are provided in the Appendix. Additional articles
were obtained from review of references from retrieved articles, as
well as articles that were known to authors.
Each section presents key recommendations followed by a
summary of the evidence (Figure 1 and Table 1). The GRADE
system was used to grade the strength of our recommendations
and the quality of the evidence (7). The strength of a recommendation is graded as “strong,” when the evidence shows the benefit of
the intervention or treatment clearly outweighs any risk, and as
“conditional,” when uncertainty exists about the risk–benefit ratio.
The quality of the evidence is graded as follows: “high,” if further
research is unlikely to change our confidence in the estimate of the
effect; “moderate,” if further research is likely to have an important
impact and may change the estimate; “low,” if further research is

1

Enteric Diseases Department, Naval Medical Research Center, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA; 2University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston,
Texas, USA; 3Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York, New York, USA. Correspondence: Mark S. Riddle, MD, DrPH, Enteric Diseases Department,
Naval Medical Research Center, 503 Robert Grant Avenue, Silver Spring, Maryland 20910, USA. E-mail: mark.s.riddle10.mil@mail.mil
Received 23 November 2015; accepted 16 March 2016

The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

VOLUME 111 | MAY 2016 www.amjgastro.com

Clinical Guideline: Acute Diarrheal Infections

Passage of .3 unformed stools in 24 h plus an enteric symptom (nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain/cramps, tenesmus, fecal
urgency, moderate to severe flatulence)

Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/ajg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWn
YQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE= on 12/17/2024

Oral fluid therapy: for all cases, hydrate through fluid and salt intake
Food: soups, broths, saltine crackers, broiled and baked foods

Dysenteric diarrhea (passage of grossly bloody stools)

Watery diarrhea

Mild illness*

Hydration
only, may use
loperamide 4 mg
initially to
control
stooling
*Illness severity:
Severe —total
disability due to
diarrhea; Moderate
= able to function
but with forced
change in activities
due to illness;
Mild = no change
in activities

Moderate-to-severe illness*

Travelassociated

Antibiotic
therapy
(Table 4)

Severe illness* with fever
(.101°F) in a single case
(not outbreak)

No or low-grade fever
(-100°F)

Non-travel-associated

No or
low-grade
fever
(≤100°F)

Consider
-48 h of
loperamide
therapy

<72 h
duration

Fever
(≥101°F)

.72 h
duration

Microbiologic assessment,
then anti-microbial agent
directed to cause for all but
STEC infection

Non-travelassociated

Consider
microbiologic
assessment

Travelassociated

Empiric
treatment,
Azithromycin
1 g in single
dose OR 500 mg
once daily
for 3 days

Persistent diarrhea (14 – 30 days) should be worked up by culture and/or culture-independent microbiologic
assessment, then treatment with anti-microbial agent directed to cause

Figure 1. Approach to empiric therapy and diagnostic-directed management of the adult patient with acute diarrhea (suspect infectious etiology).

very likely to change the estimate; “very low,” if an effect is very
uncertain (8).

EPIDEMIOLOGY AND PUBLIC HEALTH
CONSIDERATIONS
Recommendation

1. Diagnostic evaluation using stool culture and cultureindependent methods if available should be used in situations where the individual patient is at high risk of spreading
disease to others, and during known or suspected outbreaks.
(Strong recommendation, low level of evidence)
Summary of evidence. Surprisingly, there are few published
studies that describe the overall incidence of acute diarrhea
(including infectious and non-infectious causes) in the United
States. In 1998, the Foodborne Diseases Active Surveillance Network
(FoodNet) conducted a random population-based telephone
© 2016 by the American College of Gastroenterology

survey in which 12,755 persons (median age 40 years) were interviewed (9). Overall, 6% reported having experienced an acute
diarrheal illness at some point during the 4 weeks preceding the
interview (overall annualized rate, 0.72 episodes per person-year;
15–24, 1.1 episodes per person-year; 25–44, 1.7 episodes per
person-year; 45–64, 1.2 episodes per person-year). A follow-up
survey where 3,568 respondents (median age 51) were asked at
random about illness in the previous 7 days or previous month
found that recall bias had an important effect on estimates of
acute gastrointestinal illness (10). Using a 7-day exposure window, the estimated incidence of acute diarrhea was 1.6 episodes
per person-year, compared with 0.9 episodes per person-year if
asked about illness within the preceding month. Other population-based studies from Canada and western European countries
using varied methodologies estimate annual incidence between
0.1 to 3.5 episodes per person-year (11).
Specifically focusing on infectious causes of acute diarrheal
illness, in 2011 the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

603

604

Riddle et al.

Table 1. Summary and strength of recommendations
Epidemiology and public health
1. Diagnostic evaluation using stool culture and culture-independent methods if available should be used in situations where the individual patient is at high
risk of spreading disease to others, and during known or suspected outbreaks. (Strong recommendation, low level of evidence)
Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/ajg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWn
YQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE= on 12/17/2024

Diagnosis
2. Stool diagnostic studies may be used if available in cases of dysentery, moderate–severe disease, and symptoms lasting >7 days to clarify the etiology of
the patient’s illness and enable speciﬁc directed therapy.(Strong recommendation, very low level of evidence)
3. Traditional methods of diagnosis (bacterial culture, microscopy with and without special stains and immunoﬂuorescence, and antigen testing) fail to
reveal the etiology of the majority of cases of acute diarrheal infection. If available, the use of FDA-approved culture-independent methods of diagnosis can
be recommended at least as an adjunct to traditional methods. (Strong recommendation, low level of evidence)
4. Antibiotic sensitivity testing for management of the individual with acute diarrheal infection is currently not recommended. (Strong recommendation, very
low level of evidence)
Treatment of acute disease
5. The usage of balanced electrolyte rehydration over other oral rehydration options in the elderly with severe diarrhea or any traveler with cholera-like
watery diarrhea is recommended. Most individuals with acute diarrhea or gastroenteritis can keep up with ﬂuids and salt by consumption of water, juices,
sports drinks, soups, and saltine crackers. (Strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence)
6. The use of probiotics or prebiotics for the treatment of acute diarrhea in adults is not recommended, except in cases of postantibiotic-associated illness.
(Strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence)
7. Bismuth subsalicylates can be administered to control rates of passage of stool and may help travelers function better during bouts of mild-to-moderate
illness. (Strong recommendation, high level of evidence)
8. In patients receiving antibiotics for traveler’s diarrhea, adjunctive loperamide therapy should be administered to decrease duration of diarrhea and
increase chance for a cure. (Strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence)
9. The evidence does not support empiric anti-microbial therapy for routine acute diarrheal infection, except in cases of TD where the likelihood of bacterial
pathogens is high enough to justify the potential side effects of antibiotics. (Strong recommendation, high level of evidence)
10. Use of antibiotics for community-acquired diarrhea should be discouraged as epidemiological studies suggest that most community-acquired diarrhea is
viral in origin (norovirus, rotavirus, and adenovirus) and is not shortened by the use of antibiotics. (Strong recommendation, very low-level evidence)
Evaluation of persisting symptoms
11. Serological and clinical lab testing in individuals with persistent diarrheal symptoms (between 14 and 30 days) are not recommended. (Strong recommendation, very low level of evidence)
12. Endoscopic evaluation is not recommended in individuals with persisting symptoms (between 14 and 30 days) and negative stool work-up. (Strong
recommendation, very low level of evidence)
Prevention
13. Patient level counseling on prevention of acute enteric infection is not routinely recommended but may be considered in the individual or close contacts
of the individual who is at high risk for complications. (Conditional, very low level of evidence)
14. Individuals should undergo pretravel counseling regarding high-risk food/beverage avoidance to prevent traveler’s diarrhea. (Conditional, very low level
of evidence)
15. Frequent and effective hand washing and alcohol-based hand sanitizers are of limited value in preventing most forms of traveler’s diarrhea but may be
useful where low-dose pathogens are responsible for the illness as for an example during a cruise ship outbreak of norovirus infection, institutional outbreak,
or in endemic diarrhea prevention. (Conditional recommendation, low level of evidence)
Prophylaxis
16. Bismuth subsalicylates have moderate effectiveness and may be considered for travelers who do not have any contraindications to use and can adhere
to the frequent dosing requirements. (Strong recommendation, high level of evidence)
17. Probiotics, prebiotics, and synbiotics for prevention of TD are not recommended. (Conditional recommendation, low level of evidence)
18. Antibiotic chemoprophylaxis has moderate to good effectiveness and may be considered in high-risk groups for short-term use. (Strong recommendation, high level of evidence)
TD, traveler’s diarrhea.

updated the estimates of infectious gastroenteritis caused by a
myriad of viruses, bacteria, and parasites (1,2). Based on empirical
modeling of active, passive, and outbreak surveillance data ~47.8
million foodborne-related illnesses occur annually (one out of
every six persons) in the United States. Furthermore, it was estimated each year that 31 major pathogens acquired in the United
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

States caused 9.4 million episodes of diarrheal illness, 55,961 hospitalizations, and 1,351 deaths. In addition, unspecified agents
resulted in 71,878 hospitalizations and 1,686 deaths, caused ~38.4
million episodes of domestically acquired foodborne illnesses. In
addition to domestically acquired infections, over 44 million US
residents traveled abroad to non-Canadian and non-European
VOLUME 111 | MAY 2016 www.amjgastro.com

Clinical Guideline: Acute Diarrheal Infections

Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/ajg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWn
YQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE= on 12/17/2024

destinations in 2014 (12), resulting in roughly 4 to 17 million cases
of traveler’s diarrhea (TD) based on 10–40% attack rates (13). In
addition to the significant burden of the acute illness associated
with these infections, recent evidence suggests that these pathogens are linked with chronic health sequelae, including functional
gastrointestinal disorders, reactive arthritis, hemolytic uremic syndrome, and Guilliane Barré syndrome (14–20). The cost of acute
and chronic illness attributable to these infections is estimated to
be upwards of US$145 billion to the US economy (21–23).
In light of these data, acute diarrheal illness is considered a major
public health issue against which control efforts are needed. While
this guideline is primarily focused on the diagnosis, prevention,
and treatment of acute diarrhea in the individual, it is appropriate to specifically address the importance of diagnosis of the individual in the context of population health improvement. Public
health surveillance and response in the field of acute diarrhea
include strategies of infection control, anti-microbial stewardship,
outbreak investigation, as well as food and water safety interventions and regulatory policy (24). The individual patient–medical
encounter is the interface and provides critical input on which the
success of these control strategies are built. There are significant
data gaps and limitations with current burden of disease estimates
that are due to limitations in the current reporting structure (2,25).
Important multipliers for which there is significant uncertainty
in published burden of disease models include the underreporting multiplier (which adjusts data reported to health departments
as part of routine public health surveillance for the number of
infected people who seek treatment and test positive for a specific
infectious agent), and the pathogen fraction multiplier (which is
used to attribute a proportion of all episodes of gastroenteritis to
particular pathogens) (25). Improvement of estimates, which is
required to make important policy decisions, benefits from more
certain data that comes from better reporting. From an outbreak
investigation perspective, culture-based testing and reporting (and
advanced isolate characterization) is needed to provide sufficient
information to distinguish among strains or serotypes and perhaps
identify virulence characteristics and susceptibility to anti-microbial agents that relies on testing individual cases (26). Established
networks such as FoodNet and Pulsenet have demonstrated
the importance of active surveillance for examining trends in
specific diseases over time, evaluating impact of food safety policy,
as well as identifying and responding to large common source
outbreaks (27).
However, a comprehensive laboratory evaluation and advanced
characterization work-up is neither practicable nor cost-effective
for every patient presenting with an acute diarrheal infection (28).
No formal cost-effectiveness studies on the optimization of testing
and reporting has been reported and these would be challenging
to conduct. However, public health fundamentals would strongly
support individual patient testing and reporting in a number of
situations. These include diarrhea outbreaks among workers who
prepare and handle food, health-care workers, daycare (adult and
child) attendees/employees, and residents of institutional facilities
(3). Additionally, if testing is conducted for individual clinical reasons, the results of these tests should be reported to public health
© 2016 by the American College of Gastroenterology

authorities in compliance with both voluntary and mandatory
state requirements on reportable events.
Finally, with the advent of growing availability and increasing
use of culture-independent technologies in clinical laboratories
(discussed in detail later), an emerging concern is the potential
impact on replacement of culture-based methods for the aforementioned public health utilization (26). Current public health
and control strategies rely on isolate recovery, specimen preservation, and partnerships with clinical laboratories. Although
culture-independent methods provide a promise for more sensitivity of pathogen identification (leading to more accurate diseaseburden estimates), they do so with a detrimental impact on the
advanced characterization and typing, which is needed in outbreak
investigation and resistance monitoring efforts. As such, and until
new methods have evolved in which genotypic advanced characterization platforms are widely available, it is recommended that
culture-based and culture-independent testing be used in parallel
when practicable to support public health purposes.

DIAGNOSIS
Recommendations

2. Stool diagnostic studies may be used if available in cases of
dysentery, moderate-to-severe disease, and symptoms lasting
>7 days to clarify the etiology of the patient’s illness and
enable specific directed therapy. (Strong recommendation,
very low level of evidence)
3. Traditional methods of diagnosis (bacterial culture, microscopy with and without special stains and immunofluorescence, and antigen testing) fail to reveal the etiology of the
majority of cases of acute diarrheal infection. If available,
the use of Food and Drug Administration-approved cultureindependent methods of diagnosis can be recommended
at least as an adjunct to traditional methods. (Strong recommendation, low level of evidence)
4. Antibiotic sensitivity testing for management of the individual
with acute diarrheal infection is currently not recommended.
(Strong recommendation, very low level of evidence)
Summary of the evidence. The commonly accepted statement
that specific investigation is not normally required in the majority
of cases of acute watery diarrhea because it is usually self-limiting
and resolves without specific treatment may under inform the
ability to provide a more rapid resolution of symptoms with
appropriate directed therapy and potentially prevent postinfectious sequelae (29). Historical guidelines for diagnostic testing
(ACG, IDSA) seem to be too restrictive in the current environment of new diagnostic methods and enhanced ability to target
therapy (4,5).
Evidence supporting the use of diagnostic testing to support
clinical management may be different in higher-resource settings
than they would be, for example, in the traveler who is in an area
with limited access to adequate medical care or diagnostics (30).
Appropriate microbial identification may be helpful in tailoring therapy as in antibiotics for bacterial pathogens, supportive
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

605

606

Riddle et al.

Table 2. FDA-approved laboratory tests for enteric pathogens
Manufacturer

Test system

Platform

Pathogens detected
Type

No.

Detection time (h)

FDA-approved

Date-approved

Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/ajg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWn
YQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE= on 12/17/2024

Luminex

GPP

xTAG

B, V, P

15

<5

Yes

15/01/13

Hologic/Gen-Probe

ProGastro SSCS

—

B

4

4

Yes

22/01/13

BD Diagnostics

EBP

BD MAX

B

4

3–4

Yes

02/04/13

Bioﬁre Diagnostics

GI Panel

FilmArray

B, V, P

22

1–2

Yes

05/05/14

Nanosphere

EP

Verigene

B

6

2

Yes

24/06/14

B, bacteria; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; P, parasite; V, viral.

therapies, and avoidance of antibiotics for viral pathogens or
more specific anti-microbials for parasitic protozoan etiologies.
As symptoms of acute diarrhea are protean, attempts to diagnose
etiologic agents or classes are subjective at best and fraught with
imprecision due to overlap in symptoms. Although features of
the clinical presentation may be useful in distinguishing bacterial
from protozoan causes, they are often an unreliable indicator of
the likely pathogen responsible. As with any syndromic disorder,
there can be considerable overlap in symptoms caused by various
agents (31). Despite efforts in recent years to educate travelers to
recognize acute bacterial diarrhea (as opposed to protozoan) for
purposes of self-treatment, this approach is at best empiric, and
although may be suitable for travelers in remote destinations, it
does not translate well to the individual with community acquired
diarrhea (29).
Conventional diagnostic approaches to diarrheal disease
require multiple procedures: bacterial culture, microscopy with
and without stains or immunofluorescence and stool antigen tests
for detection of protozoa, and for detecting viral agents, electron
microscopy, or antigen-based tests. Routine clinical laboratory
detection of bacterial pathogens requires the use of differential
culture media, which select for the growth of certain bacteria but
may fail to detect other bacteria, especially in the setting of antibiotic use. Culture methods are laborious and time consuming,
with results often not available for 48 to 72 h (32). Historically, a
decision to obtain a stool culture in an individual with diarrhea has
often been guided by the finding of fecal leukocytes or the presence
of stool lactoferrin (4,33). Although the latter is a more sensitive
predictor of a positive stool culture, using these markers to guide
further diagnostic studies has been proven to be imprecise and
probably unnecessary.
Microscopy has been the principal diagnostic tool in parasitology
for over 350 years. The limitations of this method are that it is labor
and time intensive, requires technical expertise, and lacks sensitivity and reproducibility. Multiple specimens are often required to
reduce the day-to-day variability in parasite shedding (34).
When enteric viruses were identified as agents of acute diarrheal
infection, commercial diagnostic tests were unavailable. A reliance
on distinct characteristics of the clinical illness, often in the appropriate setting, was the standard of practice. Electron microscopical
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

examination of stool allowed recognition of viral agents of acute
diarrhea but was expensive and not widely available. Enzyme
immunoassays and serologic studies are available but suffer from
these limitations as well (35).
Diagnostics to determine specific microbial etiologies have
advanced in the past number of years. It is now possible using
culture-independent molecular techniques to rapidly and simultaneously identify a multitude of bacterial, protozoan, and viral
diarrheal pathogens including some not commonly identified in
clinical laboratories (36).
Diarrheal disease by definition has a broad range of potential
pathogens particularly well suited for multiplex molecular testing. Several well-designed studies show that molecular testing
now surpasses all other approaches for the routine diagnosis of
diarrhea. Molecular diagnostic tests can provide a more comprehensive assessment of disease etiology by increasing the diagnostic
yield compared with conventional diagnostic tests (Table 2). They
are also faster, providing results in hours rather than days (37). The
new diagnostics’ best applicability is for the clinician in practice,
seeing one patient at a time rather than in the public health setting,
e.g., in outbreak investigations. One potential drawback of molecular technologies is the need to predefine the particular microbes
being sought. In addition the significance of an identified organism
may not be clear as these molecular technologies, which involve
nucleic acid amplification, are limited to our existing knowledge
of a microbes’ genome and do not discriminate between viable and
non-viable organisms. As a result they can detect microbes at nonpathogenic levels. Given the high rates of asymptomatic carriage of
enteropathogens, this can be a considerable problem. To confound
matters, further multiplex techniques are more commonly associated with increased detection of mixed infections and the relative
importance of each pathogen may be unclear (38–47).
Before bacterial culture is discarded entirely, it is important to
acknowledge that multiplex molecular diagnostics do not yield
isolates that can be forwarded to public health laboratories. Specimens collected for culture-independent testing may, in some cases,
be incompatible with culture because of the collection methods
or media that are used for collection. And, a strict reliance on
culture-independent diagnostics would limit our ability to detect
new causes of diarrheal disease (26,48–51). The future may hold a
VOLUME 111 | MAY 2016 www.amjgastro.com

Clinical Guideline: Acute Diarrheal Infections

Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/ajg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWn
YQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE= on 12/17/2024

combination approach where culture specimens that have yielded
a positive result by culture-independent testing are then submitted
to public health laboratories for subtyping and sensitivity analysis. A second specimen may need to be submitted if specimens
are incompatible with cultures such as dry fecal swab specimens
(52–54).
Despite an increasing number of reports worldwide of resistance
to various antibiotics among bacterial enteropathogens, the clinical impact of this has yet to be manifest in a significant enough way
to warrant anti-microbial susceptibility testing across the board,
especially in the individual patient. In general, there appears to be
a low failure rate with the use of empiric anti-microbial therapy,
especially with the fluoroquinolones and macrolides (55–62).
Anti-microbial susceptibility testing will continue to have a role in
the outbreak setting and for ongoing surveillance of local trends in
resistance patterns and mechanisms (63–65).

provide high levels of potassium and carbohydrate, but low levels
of sodium and chicken broth is heavy in sodium (70,71). Travelers
with diarrhea should keep up with fluids and electrolytes through
diet to be certain they are regularly passing urine and have moist
mucous membranes.
In severe diarrhea, a balanced ORS can usually be purchased
at a local pharmacy with sodium of 60–75 mEq/l and glucose of
75–90 mmol/l (72) with value in replacing fluids and salt in dehydrating forms of diarrhea as studied in infants and children. Sports
drinks while not adequate alone to treat severe diarrhea can provide partial sodium and potassium replacement. More research is
needed to determine the optimal composition of available fluidsalt replacement beverages for travelers (73). New developments in
oral rehydration are underway, and if convenient without increasing diarrhea and without complications, they may offer advantages
in the treatment of more severe forms of TD by preventing symptoms associated with mild forms of dehydration or frank dehydration in cholera-like forms of diarrhea (74).

TREATMENT OF ACUTE DISEASE
Oral rehydration

Probiotics and prebiotics

Recommendation
5. The usage of balanced electrolyte rehydration over other oral
rehydration options in the elderly with severe diarrhea or any
traveler with cholera-like watery diarrhea is recommended.
Most individuals with acute diarrhea or gastroenteritis
can keep up with fluids and salt by consumption of water,
juices, sports drinks, soups, and saltine crackers. (Strong
recommendation, moderate level of evidence)

Recommendation
6. The use of probiotics or prebiotics for treatment of acute
diarrhea in adults is not recommended, except in cases of
postantibiotic-associated illness. (Strong recommendation,
moderate level of evidence)

Summary of the evidence. One of the most significant advances in
the past century was development of a balanced sodium-glucose
solution that allows optimal absorption of electrolytes and water.
Availability of oral rehydration solution (ORS) has reduced infant
mortality in developing countries by at least 50% (66). The major value of ORS is treatment of dehydrating forms of diarrhea
in infants and young children in developing countries. ORS may
not reduce diarrhea and the objective of ORS therapy is not to
shorten illness. In TD dehydration is not common and mortality occurs only very rarely. Among otherwise healthy people, the
risk of fatality during a bout of diarrhea is most common for the
elderly whether traveling or remaining in a nursing home. More
than 80% of deaths in the United States associated with diarrhea
occur in the elderly (67). For infants and the elderly with severe
TD and in anyone who develops profuse cholera-like watery diarrhea, balanced ORS and medical evaluation are advised. In nonelderly adult travelers with diarrhea, the objectives are generally
improving symptoms and getting the people back to scheduled
activities. A previous study of TD management in young adults
failed to identify clinical or laboratory benefit of balanced ORS
therapy in patients treated with loperamide (68). For most otherwise healthy adults with TD, formal ORS is not needed as they
can keep up with fluid losses by taking in salty soups, fruit juices,
and carbohydrates to provide the glucose-sodium cotransport
(69). Popular carbonated soft drinks provide fluids and almost
no sodium or potassium, while fruit juices (e.g., apple juice)
© 2016 by the American College of Gastroenterology

Summary of the evidence. As our understanding of the importance of the human microbiome in health and disease has advanced, interest in the use of nonpathogenic bacteria and yeast,
as well as nutrients that enhance the growth of favorable microbes
in our bodies producing enhanced colonization resistance has
also expanded (75). Probiotics are defined as live microorganisms, which, when administered in adequate amounts, confer
health benefits on the host. For a microorganism to be considered
a probiotic, it must exhibit non-pathogenic properties, be viable
in delivery vehicles, be stable in acid and bile, adhere to target
epithelial tissue, persist within the gastrointestinal tract, produce
anti-microbial substances, modulate the immune system, and
influence metabolic activities (76). Postulated mechanisms of
action of probiotics include “colonization resistance” a barrier
effect that prevents attachment or colonization of microorganisms.
Probiotics supposedly act by prohibiting pathogen attachment,
enhancing the immune response and by assisting in re-establishing the microflora (77). Prebiotics are non-digestible food ingredients that are fermentable in the colon and stimulate potentially
health-promoting bacteria, chiefly bifidobacteria and/or lactobacilli, conferring a beneficial shift in the microbial equilibrium
of the host gut flora (78). Bifidobacteria as well as lactobacilli
appear to have important functions in the ecophysiology of the
colonic microbiota. These organisms have been associated with
an increased resistance to infection and diarrheal disease (79,80).
Prebiotics when combined with probiotics form synbiotics.
Synbiotic formulations have been tested in animal models with
beneficial effects on reducing adherence of pathogenic bacteria to
the jejunum and colonic mucosa (81).
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

607

608

Riddle et al.

Table 3. Randomized double-blind placebo-controlled trials evaluating probiotics in treatment effectiveness of acute diarrhea

Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/ajg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWn
YQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE= on 12/17/2024

Study
author

Year

Location

Clinical
setting

N

Eligibility

Intervention

Outcomes

Ref.

Bruno

1981

Italy

In-patient

49

Acute enteritis
(non-typhoid)

Enterococcus LAB SF68
(Bioﬂorin: ≥75×10^6 three
times daily for 10 days).
Placebo comparator

• [P] diarrhea ≥4 days:
EXP 2/25 vs. PLAC 11/24
• [P] diarrhea ≥3 days:
EXP 6/25 vs. 17/24

(84)

Bruno

1983

Italy

In-patient

21

Acute febrile
enteritis
(non-typhoid)

Enterococcus LAB SF68
(Bioﬂorin: ≥75×10^6 three
times daily for 10 days).
Placebo comparator

• [P] diarrhea ≥4 days:
EXP 1/10 vs. PLAC 7/11
• [P] diarrhea ≥3 days:
EXP 3/10 vs. PLAC 7/11

(85)

Buydens

1996

Belgium

In-patient and
outpatient

185

Acute watery
diarrhea

Enterococcus LAB SF68
(Bioﬂorin: ≥75×10^6 three
times daily for ≥6 days).
Placebo comparator

• [P] diarrhea ≥4 days:
EXP 7/93 vs. PLAC 61/92
• [P] diarrhea ≥3 days:
EXP 57/93 vs. PLAC 88/92
• Mean (s.d.) freq. on day 3:
EXP 1.1(0.3) vs. PLAC 2.5 (1.3)

(86)

Hochter

1990

Germany

Outpatient

92

Acute diarrhea
(exclusion;
no antibiotics)

S. boulardii (600 mg/day
for 2 days then 300 mg/day
on days 3 to 7. Placebo
comparator

• Mean (s.d.) freq. on day 3:
EXP 2.4 (2.1) vs. PLAC 3.0
(2.8)

(89)

Mitra

1990

Bangladesh

Not described

183

V. cholera
(n=114) or
ETEC (n=41)
infection

Streptococcus faecium
SF68 containing 1×10(9)
of live SF68 or capsules of
placebo containing killed
SF68 (non-placebo) once
every 8 h for 3 days.

V. cholera
• Duration (h): EXP 80 vs.
PLAC 80, P=0.96
• Cumulative volume 48 h
(ml/kg body wt)
EXP 395.5 vs. PLAC 286.5,
P=0.13
ETEC
• Duration (h): EXP 24 vs.
PLAC 24, P=0.62
• Cumulative volume 48 h
(ml/kg body wt)
EXP 57.5 vs. PLAC 76.4,
P=0.42

(88)

Wunderlich

1989

Switzerland and
Lichtenstein

Not described

78

Acute diarrhea
(exclusions not
stated)

Enterococcus LAB SF68
(Bioﬂorin: 225×10^6 three
times daily for 7 days).
Placebo comparator

• [P] diarrhea ≥4 days:
EXP11/40 vs. PLAC 23/38
• [P] diarrhea ≥3 days:
EXP 19/40 vs. PLAC 27/38

(87)

ETEC, enterotoxigenic E. coli; EXP, active treatment group; [P], probability; PLAC, placebo group; s.d., standard deviation.

With respect to treatment of infectious diarrhea, it is theorized
that by enhancing intestinal colonization by specific organisms there
would be a reduction in the environmental niche for the offending
pathogen through production of acids, hydrogen peroxide, or other
anti-microbial substances, increase of mucus production, and gut
barrier defense, as well as competition for nutrients or adhesion
receptors, antitoxin action, and stimulation of the immune system
(82). In 2010, a Cochrane systematic review was published on the
topic of probiotics and treatment of intestinal infection (83). In this
review, they identified 63 randomized and quasi-randomized controlled trials comparing specific probiotic agent(s) compared with a
placebo or no-treatment with acute diarrhea of presumed infectious
etiology. Between 1966 and 2010, 63 studies including 8,014 subjects met the eligibility criteria. Only six of these trials were among
adults (84–89). Among the pediatric studies, mostly of which were
conducted among developing world populations and varied greatly
with respect to settings, organisms tested and dosage, probiotics
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

significantly reduced the duration of diarrhea (mean difference
24.8 h; 95% confidence interval (CI): 15.9–33.6 h; n=4,555, 35 trials),
and the stool frequency on day 2 (mean difference 0.80 stools;
0.5–1.1; n=2,751, 20 trials). Effect sizes did not differ between
studies carried out in developed or developing countries.
Table 3 describes six adult randomized controlled trials identified in the 2010 Cochrane Review and no additional randomized
controlled trials have subsequently been published. These studies
include two different probiotics (five studies with the single
product Enterococcus LAB SF68 and one study with Sacchromyces
boulardii). These studies were conducted in a variety of countries,
clinical settings, and used different eligibility, treatment regimens,
and primary clinical endpoints. While heterogeneity in studies is
found, one product, Enterococcus LAB SF68, had one end point,
diarrhea lasting greater than 4 days, which was combinable and
reported in the Cochrane review. Among the four studies with
similar product and end point (84–87), in the probiotic arms
VOLUME 111 | MAY 2016 www.amjgastro.com

Clinical Guideline: Acute Diarrheal Infections

Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/ajg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWn
YQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE= on 12/17/2024

21/168 (12.5%) compared with 102/165 (62%) in the placebo arms
had diarrhea lasting greater than 4 days. When combined, these
studies achieved a 79% efficacy (relative risk: 0.21, 95% CI: 0.08–
0.52) for this outcome with substantial heterogeneity (Τ2=0.56;
χ22=10.47, d.f.=3 (P=0.01); I2=71%). However, theoretical safety
concerns raised about this product limits further recommendation
(90). The one study with S. boulardii did not appear to confer any
advantage in the primary or secondary outcomes evaluated (89).
Based on the current evidence, there are not enough studies,
which would support the recommended use of any particular
probiotic product for treatment in acute adult diarrhea infection.
Although a statistically significant summary treatment effect was
observed for Enterococcus LAB SF68, heterogeneity in results does
not allow for generalization, theoretical safety concerns, and no
recent studies with this product have been reported. Recommendations on use of probiotics in pediatric populations have recently
been published (91).
A single study of polyphenol-based prebiotic has been described
in the treatment of acute diarrhea in children and adults seeking
treatment at community health centers in Managua, Nicaragua
(92). No diarrhea case definition (e.g., frequency or duration) for
inclusion was reported; however, exclusion critieria included those
with high fever, vomiting, severe dehydration, and bloody stools. A
remarkable treatment effect on mean time to last unformed stools
among the treatment group compared with placebo was reported
(prebiotic: 10.5 h vs. placebo: 54 h, P<0.0001). While important
methodological and analytic detail are missing, and understanding of potential mechanism of action is lacking, this product may
warrant additional investigation in a well-designed clinical trial.
While evidence supporting therapy of probiotics in treatment
of acute diarrheal infection is lacking, and few studies addressing
the effectiveness of probiotics in treatment of antibiotic-associated
diarrhea (93), there is supporting evidence for the role of probiotics
in prevention of acute diarrhea associated with antibiotic use (94).
The pooled results among 63 randomized controlled trials across
all population, setting, and probiotic types indicated a relative risk
reduction of 0.58, with a number needed to treat of 13. Heterogeneity and gaps in reporting of the studies, design, population, and
antibiotic associated class make clinical application of these results
to the individual patient clinical care challenging. Future research
is needed to support directed therapy and effectiveness among
various patient populations, clinical indications, antibiotics, and
probiotic strains, as well as further understanding the risk of
adverse events associated with probiotic use for these indications.
Non-antibiotic therapies

Recommendation
7. Bismuth subsalicylates (BSSs) can be administered to control
rates of passage of stool and may help travelers function
better during bouts of mild to moderate illness. (Strong
recommendation, high level of evidence)
8. In patients receiving antibiotics for TD, adjunctive loperamide therapy can be administered to decrease duration of
diarrhea and increase chance for a cure. (Strong recommendation, moderate level of evidence)
© 2016 by the American College of Gastroenterology

Summary of the evidence. Medical treatment is not required in
patients with non-severe, non-cholera-like diarrhea. Non-antibiotic anti-diarrheal drugs have been shown to reduce the number
of stools passed in cases of diarrhea allowing the ill people to continue their planned schedule. The drugs with value in controlling
symptoms with reduced rate of stooling are the antisecretory and
antimotility drugs. Intestinal secretion is the major pathophysiologic mechanism leading to watery diarrhea in some forms of
acute diarrheal infection including TD. The antisecretory drugs
that have been evaluated and shown to have value for therapy
in secretory forms of diarrhea are BSS (95), zaldaride maleate
(96), and crofelemer (97). It is the salicylate part of BSS that has
antisecretory anti-diarrheal properties (98). BSS will reduce the
stools passed by ~40% (95). Crofelemer is a cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator chloride-channel blocker and is effective
in some forms of diarrhea including TD and AIDS-associated
diarrhea (99). Zaldaride is a calmodulin-inhibiting drug that
has antisecretory properties related to intracellular concentrations of calcium (100). The drug significantly shortened the
stools passed in subjects studied with TD compared with placebo
therapy (96,101,102). Racecadotril, a specific enkephalinase
inhibitor that prevents degradation of the endogenous antisecretory peptide neurotransmitter enkephalins that inhibit
cyclic nucleotide secretory pathways without effect on gut
motility (103) and has been used successfully in pediatric diarrhea (104). While racecadotril was shown to be as effective as
loperamide in the treatment of acute endemic diarrhea in adults
(105), this antidiarrheal drug needs to be studied further in
diverse forms of diarrhea. Of the strictly antisecretory, only two
agents are approved for use by the Food and Drug Administration in the United States, BSS for treatment of acute diarrhea
and crofelemer for HIV-associated diarrhea. The recommended
dose of BSS for therapy of acute diarrhea is 30 ml (525 mg) of
liquid formulation or two tablets (263 mg per tablet) chewed
well each 30–60 min not to exceed eight doses in 24 h. The drug
will produce black stools and black tongues from harmless
bismuth sulfide salt.
The major antimotility drugs used for therapy of acute diarrhea
are loperamide and diphenoxylate. Of these, the most useful drug
is loperamide, which has less central opiate effects. Another limitation of diphenoxylate is that it contains atropine, which has no
antidiarrheal effectiveness and may produce objectionable side
effects. Loperamide works through two mechanisms, the most
important being the production of segmental contraction of the
gut, which slows the intraluminal movement of fluids and allows
greater absorption (106). A secondary effect appears to be inhibition of calmodulin leading to reduced mucosal secretion (107).
Thus, the mechanisms of antidiarrheal effect of loperamide are
indirect or direct inhibition of mucosal secretion and reduction
in motility. In a comparative randomized trial in patients with TD,
loperamide reduced the number of diarrheal stools passed when
compared with BSS (108) and loperamide was shown to shorten
diarrhea in both children (109) and adults with acute diarrhea
(110). The recommended dose of loperamide for therapy for adults
with diarrhea is 4 mg initially followed by 2 mg after subsequently
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

609

610

Riddle et al.

Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/ajg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWn
YQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE= on 12/17/2024

passed watery stools not to exceed 8 mg per day. Loperamide is
not given for more than 48 h. The most valuable use of loperamide
in the self-treatment of TD is as a combination drug with antibacterial drugs where the antimotility drug quickly reduces the
number of diarrhea stools passed while the antibiotic cures the
enteric infection (29,111).
A common complaint of loperamide therapy in acute diarrhea
is post-treatment constipation. It is important to use the lowest
dose of loperamide to provide antidiarrheal effects without the
post-treatment constipation effects of the drug. Antimotility drugs
have been associated with intestinal complications such as toxic
dilatation of the colon or prolonged illness when used in bacterial inflammatory (112,113), although the association is rare and
if it occurs it is seen with otherwise untreated diarrhea caused by
the highly inflammatory bacterial pathogens. When inflammatory forms of colitis are also treated with anti-microbial drugs, this
potentiation is very unlikely to occur (113).
Adsorbent drugs such as kaolin, pectin, charcoal, and attapulgite
do have an effect on form of stools passed, but the number of stools
passed and duration of post-treatment diarrhea are not shortened
(114,115) and are not recommended.
Antibiotic therapy

Recommendation
9. The evidence does not support empiric anti-microbial therapy
for routine acute diarrheal infection, except in cases of TD
where the likelihood of bacterial pathogens is high enough to
justify the potential side effects of antibiotics. (Strong recommendation, high level of evidence)
10. Use of antibiotics for community-acquired diarrhea should
be discouraged as epidemiological studies suggest that most
community-acquired diarrhea is viral in origin (norovirus,
rotavirus, and adenovirus) and is not shortened by the use
of antibiotics. (Strong recommendation, very low level
evidence)

Summary of evidence. The evidence for the use of anti-microbial
therapy is strongly supported for cases of TD (Table 4 lists acceptable regimens). Numerous studies have demonstrated that antibiotics shorten the overall duration of moderate-to-severe TD to
a little over 24 h (116). The primary efficacy parameter in most
clinical trials has been the time from initiation of therapy until
the last unformed stool is passed (117). Anti-bacterial drugs have
been shown to reduce initiation of therapy until the last unformed
stool is passed in cases of TD by 1–3 days compared with no
therapy or placebo (118–121), and combination of an antibiotic
with loperamide further shortens duration of illness (111). Fluoroquinolones such as ciprofloxacin or levofloxacin have been the
primary antibiotics of choice for most destinations (119,120,122),
although growing resistance to this class of antibiotics may change
this (123–125). In addition, there is evidence that most Campylobacter are fluoroquinolone resistant and the use of macrolides
such as azithromycin for treatment is recommended (126).
Azithromycin was shown to be more effective than ciprofloxacin
for all cases of TD in travelers to Thailand, probably because of the
high prevalence of Campylobacter in this region (127).
A review of nine randomized clinical trials and one Cochrane
review assessing fluoroquinolone use for the treatment of TD
(116,119,122,128–131) found overall reductions in diarrhea duration compared with placebo and evidence from these studies
showed no serious harm associated with fluoroquinolone use;
however, the literature on the use of flouroquinolones in all settings has demonstrated risks of development of Clostridium
difficile infection and risks for tendonopathies and arthropathies
(132). For all antibiotics, either single-dose therapy or treatment
for up to 3 days is usually sufficient to allow resolution of symptoms. Studies show that once daily therapy is as effective as 3-day
therapies for TD due to noninvasive pathogens, which comprise
the majority of cases (120,121). A 3-day therapy is recommended
for patients presenting with fever or dysentery. Enteric infection
by Shigella dysenteriae appears to be an exception, insofar as 5 days

Table 4. Acute diarrhea antibiotic treatment recommendations
Antibiotica

Dose

Treatment duration

Levoﬂoxacin

500 mg by mouth

Single doseb or 3-day course

Ciproﬂoxacin

750 mg by mouth or

Single doseb

Oﬂoxacin
Azithromycinc,d

e

Rifaximin

500 mg by mouth

3-day course

400 mg by mouth

Single doseb or 3-day course

1,000 mg by mouth or

Single doseb

500 mg by mouth

3-day coursed

200 mg by mouth three times daily

3-days

ETEC, Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli.
a
Antibiotic regimens may be combined with loperamide, 4 mg ﬁrst dose, and then 2 mg dose after each loose stool, not to exceed 16 mg in a 24-h period.
b
If symptoms are not resolved after 24 h, complete a 3-day course of antibiotics.
c
Use empirically as ﬁrst line in Southeast Asia and India to cover ﬂuoroquinolone-resistant Campylobacter or in other geographical areas if Campylobacter or resistant
ETEC are suspected.
d
Preferred regimen for dysentery or febrile diarrhea.
e
Do not use if clinical suspicion for Campylobacter, Salmonella, Shigella, or other causes of invasive diarrhea.

The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

VOLUME 111 | MAY 2016 www.amjgastro.com

Clinical Guideline: Acute Diarrheal Infections

Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/ajg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWn
YQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE= on 12/17/2024

of therapy appears to be superior to single-dose or 3-day therapy
(125). With increasing resistance to ampicillin and trimethoprim/
sulfamethoxazole, azithromycin has been the treatment of choice
(133,134). Recently, however, Shigella sonnei has been found to
have reduced susceptibility to azithromycin among isolates in the
United States (61).
Although no studies looked at the efficacy of azithromycin vs.
placebo, there were four randomized controlled trials that compared azithromycin to the flouroquinolones in the treatment of TD
(118,127,135,136). No difference was noted in efficacy between the
two treatment groups. Among adult student travelers to Mexico, a
single dose 1,000 mg azithromycin was comparable to levofloxacin 500 mg in shortening the duration of illness (22.3 vs. 21.5 h)
(118). Three trials demonstrate that azithromycin was as effective
as a fluoroquinolone in the treatment of TD occurring in Thailand
or Mexico (118,125,127). Azithromycin was also shown to be
active in the treatment of diarrhea caused by Campylobacter
including fluoroquinolone-resistant strains (125,137). Azithromycin is effective against Shigella spp., as well as noninvasive
diarrheagenic Escherichia coli (137,138). Looked at as a whole,
these studies suggest that azithromycin is as effective as the flouroquinolones in providing relief from TD. Anti-microbial resistance
patterns for azithromycin have been studied but results are inconclusive. One study showed that azithromycin had high activity
against TD pathogens but another suggested that concentrations
needed to inhibit diarrheagenic E. coli have been increasing over
the past decades. (26) In vitro studies showed increasing resistance
among Campylobacter isolates in Nepal and Thailand but clinical
failures have not been reported (139).
Rifaximin, a non-absorbable rifamycin-derived antibiotic,
has been shown to be effective against diarrheagenic E. coli,
which appear to be the most common bacterial pathogens in the
Western Hemisphere (140). In two studies evaluating rifaximin
compared with placebo, rifaximin was associated with a higher
percentage of travelers cured. A follow-up study carried out on
a subset of patients with diarrhea because of EAEC showed the
200 mg dose administered three times a day was more effective
than placebo in decreasing median initiation of therapy until the
last unformed stool is passed (22 vs. 72 h) (141). Two additional
studies directly compared rifaximin with ciprofloxacin. There was
no significant difference with respect to cure or treatment failure
(142,143). Another study failed to demonstrate overall advantage when ciprofloxacin was compared with rifaximin in TD in
Mexico, Guatemala, and India. However, a subgroup with invasive illness showed a reduced benefit following treatment with
rifaximin (131).
While individual self-treatment of TD among travelers has been
common since the late 1980s, there are a few microbe-specific concerns with the use of empiric anti-bacterial therapy of TD. The first
is that anti-bacterial drugs appear to complicate enteric disease
caused by Shiga-like toxin-producing E. coli by increasing the risk
of hemolytic uremic syndrome. Although this may occur more
commonly in children, a meta-analysis did not show an association
between anti-microbial therapy in adult patients with hemorrhagic
colitis due to E. coli 0157:H7 and the subsequent development of
© 2016 by the American College of Gastroenterology

hemolytic uremic syndrome (144). Another theoretical concern
with antibiotic use is that for non-typhoidal Salmonella strains,
there may be prolonged intestinal carriage. A meta-analysis showed
that antibiotic therapy does not appear to reduce the length of
illness in immunocompetent adults and increases the period
during which Salmonella was detected in stool (144). This however would not necessarily be an argument against antibiotic use
as short-term carriage appears to be of limited clinical significance
to those who are affected (145).
Another perhaps more legitimate concern is that treatment
with antibiotics will modify the microbiota. This may result
in the development of C. difficile-associated diarrhea or colitis
(132,145). A recent publication reported patients who developed
C. difficile colitis following treatment with ciprofloxacin (146).
However, this does not appear to be a common adverse outcome
associated with treated TD. We are becoming increasingly aware
that changes in an individual’s gut microbiota may be associated
with international travel to certain destinations. In a recent study,
it was shown that antibiotic use for self-treatment of TD increases
a traveler’s risk of colonization by resistant bacteria namely
extended spectrum β -lactamase-producing Enterobacteriaceae
and carbapenemase-producing Enterobacteriaceae. In this study,
travel itself was associated with a 21% rate of colonization by
extended spectrum β -lactamase-producing Enterobacteriacceae, but remarkably 80% of travelers who self-medicated with
antibiotics became colonized with these microorganisms, raising
the possibility that this might contribute to the spread of resistant
intestinal bacteria to the population at large in developed countries (147). Changes in one’s gut microbiota might have consequences with respect to an individual’s susceptibility to infection
or postinfectious consequences of intestinal infection as well, but
this is speculative at present (148). At present, the risk of acquired
extended spectrum β -lactamase on the individual and community vs. the potential negative consequences of untreated TD has
raised awareness and interest in the development of more data to
inform management decisions.
The evidence is strong for anti-microbial treatment of specific
parasitic causes of acute diarrheal infection such as metronidazole,
tinidazole, or nitazoxanide for Giardia infections, metronidazole
or tinidazole for Entameba histolytica, nitazoxanide for Cryptosporidiosis, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxasole for Cyclosporiasis or
Cystisosporiasis, albendazole for Enterocyotzooan bienusi, or iodoquinol for Diemtameba fragilis (149–155). With the advent of new
molecular diagnostics, more specific diagnoses including parasitic
etiologies may be made more promptly, guiding the targeted use of
anti-microbial therapy (both agent and duration of treatment) to
match a specific pathogen.

EVALUATION OF PERSISTING SYMPTOMS
Recommendations

11. Serological and clinical lab testing in individuals with persistent diarrheal symptoms (between 14 and 30 days) is not
recommended. (Strong recommendation, very low level of
evidence)
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

611

612

Riddle et al.

12. Endoscopic evaluation is not recommended in individuals
with persisting symptoms (between 14 and 30 days) and
negative stool work-up. (Strong recommendation, very low
level of evidence)
Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/ajg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWn
YQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE= on 12/17/2024

Summary of evidence

In the evaluation of the patient with persistent symptoms, a thorough and directed history is essential. Relevant questions would
include travel history, the nature of the initial symptoms, onset
(sudden or gradual), duration, frequency and characteristics of
bowel movements (particularly the presence of blood or mucus),
stool volume, tenesmus, pattern, association with particular
foods, use of antibiotics, and the presence or absence of other
associated symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, incontinence,
fever, and weight loss. The answers to these questions may direct
further investigations (156).
Among patients with persistent symptoms (between 14 and
30 days), the role of clinical laboratory studies and endoscopy
is uncertain and should be dictated by clinical suspicion and
disease severity, within the context of most likely etiologies. An
initial diagnostic evaluation in the patient with persistent symptoms should include tests for the presence of microbial pathogens.
Although stool culture and microscopy remain the initial diagnostic tests, they both suffer from limitations that may be addressed
by newer diagnostic methods. Even some of the newer methods,
such as enzyme-linked immunoassays and direct immunofluorescence staining, which increase sensitivity, may not be able to distinguish, e.g., between the pathogen Entamoeba histolytica and a
non-pathogenic but microscopically indistinguishable Entamoeba
dispar. (157). Singleplex and multiplex PCR assays for the detection of enteric microbial pathogens are more sensitive than culture,
microscopy, or antigen detection (158–160). In one study describing a real-time PCR assay designed to detect Giardia intestinalis,
the lower limit of detection was as little as 102 spores per ml of
stool as opposed to microscopy, which required >106 spores per ml
of stool (161).7 One study showed using PCR methods resulted in
a 22-fold increase in the detection of Cryptosporidium and Giardia
compared with conventional microscopy (162). Colonoscopy
has been considered in the evaluation of the patient with persistent diarrhea. In a recent study looking at the diagnostic value
of endoscopy for the diagnosis of giardiasis or other intestinal
diseases in patients with persistent diarrhea returning from tropical
or subtropical areas, lower endoscopy (colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy) yielded relevant diagnoses more often than upper endoscopy (163). This study, however, suffers from a small sample size
insofar as only 31 patients with persistent diarrhea were examined and thus the additional value of such procedures cannot be
recommended. In certain clinical situations such as postantibiotic
or hospital-acquired gastrointestinal illness, testing for Clostridium
difficile may be recommended, as well as additional serologic and
clinical laboratory testing including a complete blood count, which
may be helpful in informing an infectious cause in the absence of
revealing stool studies.
While not considered in these guidelines, the work-up of
chronic diarrhea is briefly considered and should include the
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

differential diagnoses such as celiac disease, Crohn’s disease, eosinophilic gastroenteritis, and Whipple’s disease. Gastrointestinal
endoscopy and relevant serological assays may contribute to the
diagnosis and management if sustained or progressive weight loss
is a prominent feature, and upper endoscopy may be considered,
especially if empiric therapy and symptomatic measures have not
helped. Mucosal biopsies are recommended even when the endoscopic appearance is normal. The diagnostic yield of colonoscopy
in patients ranges from 7 to 32%, with IBD and microscopic colitis being the most common diagnoses (164–169). It has also been
seen that colonoscopy yields a noninfectious diagnosis more often
than upper endoscopy (170–172). A review of 18 primary studies looking at the diagnostic value of colonoscopy in patients with
chronic diarrhea, as well as a review of nine published guidelines
provides the basis for a colonoscopy recommendation in such
patients (165,167,168,173–186).
In the situation of chronic diarrhea and abdominal symptoms
occurring after a bout of infectious diarrhea, a diagnosis of postinfectious irritable bowel syndrome must be considered (187).
Postinfectious irritable bowel syndrome requires a paradigm shift:
an external event, in this case a gastrointestinal infection, leads to
prolonged and permanent changes in gastrointestinal function,
which do not appear to be directly mediated by the persistence
of an infectious agent. There appears to be a physiologic basis
for the apparent failure to downregulate intestinal inflammation
but there are no commercially available serologic or other diagnostic tests to confirm and the diagnosis rests on using conventional criteria such as Rome III in patients who have been sick with
gastroenteritis or TD.

PREVENTION
Counseling

Recommendations
13. Patient level counseling on prevention of acute enteric infection is not routinely recommended but may be considered
in the individual or close-contacts of the individual who is at
high risk for complications. (Conditional, very low level of
evidence)
14. Individuals should undergo pretravel counseling regarding
high risk food/beverage avoidance to prevent TD. (Conditional, very low level of evidence)
Summary of evidence. Non-travel setting: One in six US citizens
get sick from a foodborne illness each year, and a majority of these
illness will be from contaminated food consumed in the United
States (e.g., non-travel associated) (1,2). Food safety is a major
public health effort that involves multiple Federal, State, and
local agencies including the Food and Drug Administration, US
Department of Agriculture, US Food Inspection Service, and state
and local health departments, all of which focus on the potential
risks for large outbreaks associated with centralization of food
processing and reliance on imported foods. However, to reduce
the burden of disease the responsibility of foodborne prevention must not only include the producers on the farm, packaging
VOLUME 111 | MAY 2016 www.amjgastro.com

Clinical Guideline: Acute Diarrheal Infections

Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/ajg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWn
YQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE= on 12/17/2024

industries, stores, and restaurants but also penetrate down to the
individuals in the home who are buying and preparing food—the
last step in the chain of foodborne illness prevention.
The intervention of improving food preparation in the home
has not been systematically studied. The Centers for Disease
Control has recently responded through launching a new consumer food safety campaign to educate the public on the simple
message of clean, separate, cook, chill, and report. No recommendations on counseling by providers have been provided. No
recommendations on counseling by providers have been recommended. However, for vulnerable patient populations who are
at increased risk for severe disease and complications associated
with acute foodborne illness, including pregnant women, elderly,
and those with immune deficiency due to HIV or immunotherapeutic, situational individual patient level counseling may
be appropriate.
Traveler setting: In the realm of travel medicine, Shlim reviewed
the evidence for the effectiveness of personal hygiene precautions
in prevention of TD (188). In the eight studies identified in this
2005 review, seven found no correlation between the types of
food selected by the traveler and the risk of acquiring traveler’s
diarrhea, whereas one showed a correlation between a few
dietary lapses. The summary from this review provides the basis
for current recommendations where it was stated, “The sum total
of these errors leads to abundant opportunities for the spread
of enteric pathogens, whether from employees’ hands, flies, or
contaminated meat and produce, with ample time available for
bacterial growth to reach infective levels. One could postulate
that “boil it, cook it, peel it, or forget it” would be good advice to
someone who was purchasing and preparing their own food in a
sanitized kitchen but that it is inadequate for travelers faced with
the multiplicity of hygienic errors found in the kitchens of many
destination countries”.
Subsequent to this review there have been few studies reported
on this topic. A recent report among travelers who attended a travel
clinic before travel (‘exposed’) and travelers to similar regions but
did not attend travel clinic (‘non-exposed’) was reported (189). In
this study, 13 (4.3%) of those interviewed reported drinking unsafe
water and this proportion was similar in those who attended or did
not attend travel clinic before travel (exposed (n=7/150, 4.6%) and
non-exposed subjects (n=6/150; 4%) (P=0.78)). Forty-five (15%) of
enrolled subjects ate some food with elevated risk of traveler’s diarrhea (such as raw fruit or vegetables, drink with ice or ice cream);
this proportion was higher in the non-exposed people (n=36/150;
24%) than in the people attending the Travel Clinic (n=9/150; 6%)
(P<0.0001). Fifty (16.7%) reported diarrhea or gastrointestinal
symptoms, 9 (6%) in the group of exposed subjects and 41 (27.3%)
in the non-exposed group (P<0.0001), suggesting some effect of
pretravel counseling, although there could have been other factors
related to the self-selection of exposed (more cautious given their
seeking out of pretravel counseling) and non-exposed travelers,
which could explain these differences.
In summary, the evidence of counseling effectiveness on TD risk
reduction related to food and water indiscretion is mixed and lacks
recent high-quality studies.
© 2016 by the American College of Gastroenterology

Hand washing

Recommendation
15. Frequent and effective hand washing and alcohol-based hand
sanitizers are of limited value in preventing most forms of
traveler’s diarrhea but may be useful where low-dose pathogens are responsible for the illness as for an example during
a cruise ship outbreak of norovirus infection, institutional
outbreak, or in endemic diarrhea prevention. (Conditional
recommendation, low level of evidence)
Summary of evidence. Traveler setting: The evidence of hand
washing and use of alcohol-based hand sanitizers in preventing TD is mixed. Theoretically, they would be most effective in
prevention of enteric infection caused by pathogens causing
illness at low inoculum doses. Enteric pathogens can be divided
into three categories based on expected dose necessary to cause
diarrhea. The most contagious enteric pathogens are noroviruses
and Shigella strains (190) because of low inoculum requirements plus stability in the environment (191). Hand washing
should be effective in reducing these highly communicable
pathogens and should be aggressively pursued in settings where
one of these is likely to occur, e.g., during cruise-ship travel or
in a community or institutional outbreak due to one of these
pathogens.
The expected dose for the diarrheagenic E. coli strains, the most
common causes of TD, is high in the level of one million bacteria
or higher (192,193) with the infections nearly always a result
of ingestion of contaminated foods where food has been
improperly handled allowing propagation of the pathogen to
diarrhea-causing levels. Effective hand washing or regular use of
alcohol-based hand sanitizers could well be useful in preventing
TD if thoroughly pursued by persons preparing food eaten by
other travelers, but is unlikely to impact when done by the person
consuming the contaminated food.
For cruise travelers regular hand washing can be useful in case
there is apparent or inapparent transmission of norovirus infection. Alcohol-based hand sanitizers often have anti-viral properties
(194), although in one study hand washing with soap and water
was effective in removing norovirus from hands, while alcoholbased hand sanitizers were not (195). In a retrospective survey of
protective measures against TD, regular use of alcohol hand sanitizers did not appear to offer any protection against either diarrhea
or respiratory tract infection in travelers (196). Again, this lack of
prevention of TD probably relates to the high inoculum requirements of the common forms of infection. This is in contrast to the
established value of hand washing in preventing endemic pediatric diarrhea in developing regions where lower inoculum pathogens are common (197,198). In developing regions the presence
of soap in homes is associated with reduced diarrhea rates in local
populations living in unhygienic areas (199). Alcohol-based hand
disinfectant use in a public setting in Germany did provide protection against respiratory and diarrheal illness in a randomized study
in local non-traveling inhabitants (200). Hygiene including hand
washing undoubtedly has a greater effect in preventing diarrhea
in wilderness backpackers (201) who may have exposures more
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

613

614

Riddle et al.

resembling endemic settings in the developing world than those
seen with typical travelers staying in clean hotels.
Prophylaxis
Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/ajg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWn
YQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE= on 12/17/2024

Recommendations
16. Bismuth subsalicylates have moderate effectiveness and may
be considered for travelers who do not have any contraindications to use and can adhere to the frequent dosing requirements. (Strong recommendation, high level of evidence)
17. Probiotics, prebiotics, and synbiotics for prevention of
traveler’s diarrhea are not recommended. (Conditional
recommendation, low level of evidence)
18. Antibiotic chemoprophylaxis has moderate to good effectiveness and may be considered in high-risk groups for shortterm use. (Strong recommendation, high level of evidence)
Summary of evidence. Traveler setting: Prevention of TD is
challenging because of the ubiquitous exposures to individuals through contaminated food, water, and generally unhygienic
conditions among much of the developing world. Travelers are
frequently counseled on preventive risk behaviors, but despite
a traveler’s best attention to such recommendations, evidence is
lacking that such precautions have any protective effect (188).
Although vaccines for many of the agents commonly associated
with TD are under development, these are considered a long-term
solution and might likely suffer from the lack of utilization as has
been seen with most travel-associated vaccines (202–206). Alternative primary prevention strategies such as BSS, probiotics, and
antibiotics have been evaluated and are considered here.
Bismuth subsalicylate. BSS has been shown in several studies to
reduce the frequency of TD when used during period of risk for
3 weeks (207–209). While the salicylate portion of the drug provides antidiarrheal effects, it is the bismuth moiety that is active
when the molecule is used for chemoprophylaxis (210). BSS and
the bismuth reaction products found in the gut have dose-responsive activity against bacteria (211) and anti-viral properties (212).
The drug provides at least 60% protection in a dose of 2.1 g per day
(207,208). The recommended dose of BSS for TD prevention is
two tablets four daily doses at mealtimes and at bedtime. Both the
dose and the interval of administration appear to be important as
2.1 and 1.05 g given two times a day led to reduced levels of protection, 41% and 35%, respectively (209). The chemoprophylactic
dose of BSS leads to important absorption of salicylate and should
not be used when other salicylates are being taken. BSS does not
have the damaging effects on gastric mucosa as acetyl salicylic
acid effects and, in fact, has intestinal mucosa-cytoprotective effects (213,214).
BSS use has been shown to reduce the occurrence of TD if taken
in proper daily dose for up to 3 weeks. Most authorities recommend that chemoprophylaxis could be used for trips up to 2 weeks
(215). Chemoprophylaxis should not be used for longer trips.
Future travelers planning to use BSS chemoprophylaxis need to
be warned that during administration of the drug their stools and
tongues will turn black and that this harmless bismuth sulfide salt
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

is of no medical concern. Persons with underlying inflammatory
bowel disease or HIV infection should not receive BSS because of
the fear of excessive absorption of this generally poorly absorbed
bismuth compound leading to bismuth encephalopathy (216).
Probiotic/prebiotic/synbiotics. The use of probiotics, prebiotics,
and synbiotics to prevent acute diarrheal infection is an appealing
concept because of their ease of use and relative safety. The data,
however, supporting their use in preventing infectious diarrhea
is not consistently strong and at this point we do not recommend
them for this purpose
The preventive role of probiotics, prebiotics, and synbiotics in
acute diarrheal infection in adults is limited to studies in prospective travelers (217–226). There are no published studies in the setting of community-acquired diarrhea, in the outbreak setting for
example. Available studies suffer from variability in age groups,
setting, causes of acute diarrhea, and probiotic strains. Although
most of the trials are of adequate quality, limitations include short
follow-up and not estimating person-time analysis. There were also
large variations in the dosage of probiotics, frequency of administration, and formulations used. Further variation was seen with
regard to timing and administration of these preparations relative
to a number of factors including travel and concurrent treatment
with anti-microbials (217). Although two meta-analyses suggest a
marginal benefit of probiotics in prevention of TD, both suggest
there is insufficient evidence for extrapolation to global recommendations for their use (217,218).
Probiotics. In the past three decades, trials investigating the effects of probiotics in the prevention of TD have demonstrated
varying results (219). In one of the earlier studies, Enterococcus
faecium did not prevent TD. In a study by the same group, Saccharomyces boulardii given to 3,000 Austrian travelers in a placebocontrolled manner resulted in a clinically modest dose-dependent
benefit in TD prevention, effects were most impressive in travelers
to North Africa and Turkey (220). In a study of 756 Finnish travelers to two separate destinations in Turkey, a 41% diarrhea attack
rate was noted in the Lactobacillus GG group vs. 46.5% in the placebo group, a very modest difference. However, the rate of protection was 39.5% at one location and almost nil at the other location
(221). In a US study of 245 travelers to various destinations those
taking Lactobacillus GG experienced a 3.9% incidence of diarrhea
per day at risk vs. 7.4% in the placebo group. Using this novel
approach to protective efficacy, they calculated a protection rate
of 47% (222). Lactobacillus bulgaricus as well as Lactobacillus fermentum preparations were found to be ineffective in preventing
TD (223,224) and there was no beneficial effect seen with a nonviable formulation of Lactobacillus acidophilus in the prevention of
TD in a randomized placebo-controlled trial in travelers to West
Africa and other destinations (227).
Prebiotics and synbiotics. Early work showed the prebiotic
Lactulose reduced intestinal carriage of Shigella but was ineffective in treating Shigella infections (228). In a small study of
42 adult patients traveling to tropical countries (22 in the study
VOLUME 111 | MAY 2016 www.amjgastro.com

Clinical Guideline: Acute Diarrheal Infections

Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/ajg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWn
YQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE= on 12/17/2024

group, 20 in the placebo group), the use of sodium butyrate and
short-chain fatty acids as a prebiotic was evaluated for the prevention of TD (229). Noted was a significant reduction in the occurrence of TD in the prebiotic group (4.5%) vs. 40% in the placebo
group. Sodium butyrate has been established in animal studies
as a regulator of the intestinal environment. Limitations of the
study included sample size and lack of diversity among the travelers. A double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of a novel galactooligosaccharide mixture in 159 healthy travelers to countries
of low and high risk for TD showed a significant reduction in
diarrhea in the prebiotic group as compared with those who
consumed placebo (maltodextrin) (225). This particular formulation was studied because of earlier work showing this agent
increased bifidobacferium numbers in the colonic content of
piglets and inhibited the attachment of enterohepatic E. coli and
Salmonella enterica Typhimurium to HT29 cells in vitro (230).
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of an oral
synbiotic AKSB, a combination of two probiotics (Enterococcus
faecium and S. cervisiae) and a prebiotic (fructo-oligosaccharide),
failed to show benefit (226).
For probiotics, prebiotics, and synbiotics alike the challenge has
been to find the right formulation or combination for the right
condition or individual. Mirroring the use of these agents in other
gastrointestinal diseases, a more thorough knowledge of the host
microbiome might be necessary before appropriate trials can be
designed using specific agents for prevention.
Antibiotics. Anti-microbial prophylaxis has been considered an
option to prevent infection. In 1985 issues surrounding prophylaxis were debated during an NIH-sponsored consensus meeting, which concluded that routine antibiotic chemoprophylaxis
should not be used because of concerns about the development of
antibiotic resistance, the demonstrated efficacy of empiric therapy
after the development of symptoms, and the potential for unnecessary side effects (231). Since that meeting, studies that have
examined the cost benefit of chemoprophylaxis for the prevention of TD have recommended against prophylaxis except in
high-risk groups (232,233). While debate continues, the standard
practice and recommendation has remained unchanged for 20
years (234–236).
Two recent developments are challenging the general recommendation against use of chemoprophylaxis. First, postinfectious
irritable bowel syndrome has been recognized as an important
chronic health consequence, occurring in a sizeable proportion of
those who experience an episode of TD, particularly among those
with bacterial infection and a more severe clinical presentation
(237–239). Second, rifaximin, a non-absorbable antibiotic, has
been developed and may provide a safer alternative for prophylaxis than fluoroquinolones, which are known to be quite effective
but may have an unacceptable safety profile. The high volume of
international travel and, consequently, the high number of people
at risk for acquiring TD, postinfectious irritable bowel syndrome
and other postinfectious chronic health conditions, creates a
potentially large burden of illness that could be prevented with
the use of safe and effective chemoprophylaxis. However, safety
© 2016 by the American College of Gastroenterology

concerns associated with antibiotic use, of any class, is an important consideration.
A recent systematic review summarized several studies showing a comparative advantage of antibiotic chemoprophylaxis for
the prevention of TD (240). Four rifaximin studies included in
the meta-analysis had a total of 604 subjects. One of those studies
(DuPont et al. (241)) had three treatment arms (rifaximin 200 mg
dosed once, two and three times a day) and one control arm
(placebo dosed three times a day). There was no observed significant difference of risk reduction among dosing regimens in the
Dupont et al. study, and the overall pooled DerSimonian and Laird
effect (relative risk) estimate for all studies combined was 0.33
(95% CI: 0.24–0.45), equating to a protective efficacy of 67% (95%
CI: 55–76%) favoring chemoprophylaxis (heterogeneity χ2=3.09,
P=0.377; I2=3.1%). In terms of absolute risk reduction, pooled
DerSimonian and Laird summary estimates found that rifaximin
chemoprophylaxis decreased TD attack rates by a mean of 22.1%
(95% CI: 6.3–37.9%) equating to a number needed to treat of 4.5
(95% CI: 2.6–15.9). With respect to rifaximin chemoprophylaxis,
two studies (Armstrong et al. (242) and Flores et al. (243)) did not
show that chemoprophylaxis with rifaximin reached a statistically
significant difference in preventing TD compared with placebo
(242,243). In both studies the incidence of TD in the control group
was relatively low (8/48 or 17% and 9/47 or 19%, respectively),
which could have explained the findings given sample size calculations were based on the expected incidence of TD to be 40%, and
thus recruitment may have been too small to detect the true effect
of rifaximin in preventing TD. Most recently, an effectiveness study
by Zanger et al. (244) reported moderate protection with rifaximin
for up to 28 days to the South and Southeast Asian regions (244).
Efficacy was noted to be higher in travelers to countries in South
Asia (65%, 95% CI: 15–77) compared with Southeast Asia, which
is likely attributed to differential (invasive) pathogen distributions
(no microbiology was conducted in the study). However, a study by
Taylor et al. (245) suggests that rifaximin may be effective against
shigellosis, which is a common invasive TD pathogen (and also
associated with chronic health complications) (246). There were
no serious adverse drug-associated safety adverse events reported
among these published studies.
While no recent studies have been conducted, floroquinolones
consistently demonstrate a higher effectiveness in the prevention
of TD with a summary pooled estimate of 88% (95% CI: 80–93%)
protective efficacy (240). The emergence of fluoroquinolone resistance to commonly encountered TD pathogens may be a factor
today if these studies were replicated (139,247,248). Furthermore,
relative to rifaximin, the safety profile for floroquinolones is less
favorable given the association with tendonopathies and the systemic broad-spectrum nature of this antibiotic with attendant
pressures on systemic drug-resistant pathogens of importance
(132).
The evidence to date suggests moderate to good efficacy of
rifaximin and floroquinolones for chemoprophylaxis. However, until such studies are carried out, which adequately assess
the risk and benefits of this strategy in reduction of acute and
chronic consequences while balance the negative consequences
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

615

616

Riddle et al.

Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/ajg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWn
YQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE= on 12/17/2024

of antibiotic use, recommendations for use in the traveler setting
should be restrictive and used in short durations. The traveler
who is at high risk for TD and susceptible to potentially serious
health consequences, or whose illness may critically impact the
intended purpose of travel, may benefit from antibiotic chemoprophylaxis.

REFERENCES
1.
2.
3.

4.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This guideline was produced in collaboration with the Practice
Parameters Committee of the American College of Gastroenterology. The Committee gives special thanks to Ganesh R. Veerappan,
who served as guideline monitor for this document. We thank
the Cornell University reference librarian, Kevin Pain, for his
assistance and expertise in conducting the systematic review of
the literature and providing articles. We also are grateful to Lauren
Gerson for her support and direction in the development of this
guideline.

5.
6.
7.

8.
9.

10.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST

Guarantor of the article: Mark S. Riddle, MD, DrPH.
Specific author contributions: All authors had an equal role in
reviewing the literature, developing the recommendations, critically
appraising the evidence, and drafting the manuscript. All authors
have approved the final draft submitted.
Financial support: No financial support was received by any of the
authors for development of these guidelines.
Potential competing interests (past 2 years): Mark S. Riddle—Salix
Pharmaceuticals (research support and participated on advisory
boards), Romark (advisory board participant), Janssen Pharmaceuticals (cooperative research and development agreement), Prometheus
Laboratories (cooperative research and development agreement);
Takeda Vaccines (advisory board and cooperative research and
development agreement); LimmaTech Biologics (cooperative
research and development agreement); Herbert L. DuPont—Salix
Pharmaceuticals (participated on advisory boards), PaxVax (DSMB
Board member), Romark (advisory board), GSK (consultant and
grant support through university), Sanofi Pasteur (grant support
through university), Takeda (grant support through university); Seres
Health (grant support through university); Bradley A. Connor—Salix
Pharmaceuticals (advisory board participant), PaxVax (speaker’s
bureau), Romark (advisory board participant).
Copyright statement: One of the authors (Mark S. Riddle) is an
employee of the U.S. Government and is a military service member.
This work was prepared as part of official duties. Title 17 U.S.C. §105
provides that “Copyright protection under this title is not available
for any work of the United States Government”. Title 17 U.S.C. §101
defines a U.S. Government work as a work prepared by a military
service member or employee of the U.S. Government as part of that
person’s official duties.
DISCLAIMER

The views expressed in this article do not necessarily reflect the
official policy or position of the Department of the Navy, Department of Defense, nor the US Government. This is a partial US
Government work. There are no restrictions on its use.
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

11.
12.

13.
14.

15.
16.

17.

18.

19.

20.
21.

22.
23.
24.
25.
26.

27.
28.
29.

Scallan E, Griffin PM, Angulo FJ et al. Foodborne illness acquired in the
United States—unspecified agents. Emerg Infect Dis 2011;17:16–22.
Scallan E, Hoekstra RM, Angulo FJ et al. Foodborne illness acquired in
the United States—major pathogens. Emerg Infect Dis 2011;17:7–15.
Surawicz CM, Brandt LJ, Binion DG et al. Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of Clostridium difficile infections. Am J Gastroenterol 2013;108:478–98.quiz 499.
DuPont HL. Guidelines on acute infectious diarrhea in adults. The Practice Parameters Committee of the American College of Gastroenterology.
Am J Gastroenterol 1997;92:1962–75.
Guerrant RL, Van Gilder T, Steiner TS et al. Practice Guidelines for the
Management of Infectious Diarrhea. Clin Infect Dis 2001;32:331–51.
Farthing M, Salam MA, Lindberg G et al. Acute diarrhea in adults and
children: a global perspective. J Clin Gastroenterol 2013;47:12–20.
Gross PA, Barrett TL, Dellinger EP et al. Purpose of quality standards for
infectious diseases.Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis
1994;18:421.
Atkins D, Best D, Briss PA et al. Grading quality of evidence and strength
of recommendations. BMJ 2004;328:1490.
Imhoff B, Morse D, Shiferaw B et al. Burden of self-reported acute diarrheal
illness in FoodNet surveillance areas, 1998-1999. Clin Infect Dis 2004;
38:Suppl 3 S219–S226.
Cantwell LB, Henao OL, Hoekstra RM et al. The effect of different recall
periods on estimates of acute gastroenteritis in the United States, FoodNet
Population Survey 2006–2007. Foodborne Pathog Dis 2010;7:1225–8.
Roy SL, Scallan E, Beach MJ. The rate of acute gastrointestinal illness in
developed countries. J Water Health 2006;4:Suppl 2 31–69.
US Department of Commerce. 2014 US Travel and Tourism Statistics (US
Resident Outbound), Monthly US Outbound Air Travel to International Regions. Available at: http://travel.trade.gov/view/m-2014-O-001/14outbound.xls,
National Travel and Tourism Office (NTTO); 2014 last accesed 1 March 2015.
Steffen R, Hill DR, DuPont HL. Traveler’s diarrhea: a clinical review.
JAMA 2015;313:71–80.
Ford AC, Thabane M, Collins SM et al. Prevalence of uninvestigated
dyspepsia 8 years after a large waterborne outbreak of bacterial dysentery:
a cohort study. Gastroenterology 2010;138:1727–36.quiz e12
Mearin F. Postinfectious functional gastrointestinal disorders. J Clin
Gastroenterol 2011;45:S102–S105.
Mearin F, Perello A, Balboa A et al. Pathogenic mechanisms of postinfectious functional gastrointestinal disorders: results 3 years after gastroenteritis. Scand J Gastroenterol 2009;44:1173–85.
Porter CK, Gloor K, Cash BD et al. Risk of functional gastrointestinal
disorders in U.S. military following self-reported diarrhea and vomiting
during deployment. Dig Dis Sci 2011;56:3262–9.
Porter CK, Gormley R, Tribble DR et al. The incidence and gastrointestinal infectious risk of functional gastrointestinal disorders in a healthy US
adult population. Am J Gastroenterol 2011;106:130–8.
Tuteja AK, Talley NJ, Gelman SS et al. Development of functional
diarrhea, constipation, irritable bowel syndrome, and dyspepsia during
and after traveling outside the USA. Dig Dis Sci 2008;53:271–6.
Raja MK, Ghosh AR. Laribacter hongkongensis: an emerging pathogen of
infectious diarrhea. Folia Microbiol 2014;59:341–7.
Hoffmann S, Batz MB, Morris JGJr. Annual cost of illness and qualityadjusted life year losses in the United States due to 14 foodborne pathogens. J Food Prot 2012;75:1292–302.
Scharff RL. Economic burden from health losses due to foodborne illness
in the United States. J Food Prot 2012;75:123–31.
Minor T, Lasher A, Klontz K et al. The per case and total annual costs of
foodborne illness in the United States. Risk Anal 2015;35:1125–39.
Braden CR, Tauxe RV. Emerging trends in foodborne diseases. Infect Dis
Clin N Am 2013;27:517–33.
Glass K, Ford L, Kirk MD. Drivers of uncertainty in estimates of foodborne gastroenteritis incidence. Foodborne Pathog Dis 2014;11:938–44.
Caliendo AM, Gilbert DN, Ginocchio CC et al. Better tests, better care:
improved diagnostics for infectious diseases. Clin Infect Dis 2013;
57:Suppl 3 S139–S170.
Jones TF, Scallan E, Angulo FJ. FoodNet: overview of a decade of
achievement. Foodborne Pathog Dis 2007;4:60–6.
Donnenberg MS, Narayanan S. How to diagnose a foodborne illness.
Infect Dis Clin N Am 2013;27:535–54.
DuPont HL, Ericsson CD, Farthing MJ et al. Expert review of the evidence
base for self-therapy of travelers’ diarrhea. J Travel Med 2009;16:161–71.

VOLUME 111 | MAY 2016 www.amjgastro.com

Clinical Guideline: Acute Diarrheal Infections

Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/ajg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWn
YQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE= on 12/17/2024

30. Shah N, DuPont HL, Ramsey DJ. Global etiology of travelers’ diarrhea:
systematic review from 1973 to the present. Am J Trop Med Hyg 2009;80:
609–14.
31. Mattila L. Clinical features and duration of traveler’s diarrhea in relation
to its etiology. Clin Infect Dis 1994;19:728–34.
32. Humphries RM, Linscott AJ. Laboratory diagnosis of bacterial gastroenteritis. Clin Microbiol Rev 2015;28:3–31.
33. Lee HM, Lee S, Lee BI et al. Clinical significance of fecal lactoferrin and
multiplex polymerase chain reaction in patients with acute diarrhea. Gut
Liver 2014;23:636–40.
34. Libman MD, Gyorkos TW, Kokoskin E et al. Detection of pathogenic
protozoa in the diagnostic laboratory: result reproducibility, specimen
pooling, and competency assessment. J Clin Microbiol 2008;46:2200–5.
35. Glass RI, Parashar UD, Estes MK. Norovirus gastroenteritis. N Engl J Med
2009;361:1776–85.
36. Raich TJ, Powell S. The changing landscape of diagnostic testing for
diarrheal disease. Med Lab Obs 2014;46:36–38.
37. Dunbar SA. Molecular revolution entering GI diagnostic testing. Med Lab
Obs 2013;45:28.
38. Goldenberg SD, Bacelar M, Brazier P et al. A cost benefit analysis of the
Luminex xTAG Gastrointestinal Pathogen Panel for detection of infectious gastroenteritis in hospitalised patients. J Infect 2015;70:504–11.
39. Drancourt M. Multiplex testing of diarrhoea breaks down microbial
barriers. Lancet Infect Dis 2014;14:663–4.
40. Beckmann C, Heininger U, Marti H et al. Gastrointestinal pathogens
detected by multiplex nucleic acid amplification testing in stools of
pediatric patients and patients returning from the tropics. Infection
2014;42:961–70.
41. Halligan E, Edgeworth J, Bisnauthsing K et al. Multiplex molecular testing
for management of infectious gastroenteritis in a hospital setting: a
comparative diagnostic and clinical utility study. Clin Microbiol Infect
2014;20:O460–O467.
42. Cheun HI, Chung BS, Ma DW et al. Development of a diagnostic kit to
detect Cryptosporidium parvum and Giardia lamblia. Osong Public Health
Res Perspect 2013;4:146–51.
43. Saigal K, Khurana S, Sharma A et al. Comparison of staining techniques
and multiplex nested PCR for diagnosis of intestinal microsporidiosis.
Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 2013;77:248–9.
44. Antikainen J, Kantele A, Pakkanen SH et al. A quantitative polymerase
chain reaction assay for rapid detection of 9 pathogens directly from
stools of travelers with diarrhea. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2013;11:
1300–7.e3.
45. McAuliffe GN, Anderson TP, Stevens M et al. Systematic application of
multiplex PCR enhances the detection of bacteria, parasites, and viruses
in stool samples. J Infect 2013;67:122–9.
46. Liu J, Kibiki G, Maro V et al. Multiplex reverse transcription PCR Luminex
assay for detection and quantitation of viral agents of gastroenteritis. J Clin
Virol 2011;50:308–13.
47. Buchan BW, Olson WJ, Pezewski M et al. Clinical evaluation of a realtime PCR assay for identification of Salmonella, Shigella, Campylobacter
(Campylobacter jejuni and C. coli), and shiga toxin-producing Escherichia
coli isolates in stool specimens. J Clin Microbiol 2013;51:4001–7.
48. Gray J, Coupland LJ. The increasing application of multiplex nucleic acid
detection tests to the diagnosis of syndromic infections. Epidemiol Infect
2014;142:1–11.
49. Liu Y, Xu ZQ, Zhang Q et al. Simultaneous detection of seven enteric
viruses associated with acute gastroenteritis by a multiplexed Luminexbased assay. J Clin Microbiol 2012;50:2384–9.
50. Platts-Mills JA, Operario DJ, Houpt ER. Molecular diagnosis of diarrhea:
current status and future potential. Curr Infect Dis Rep 2012;14:41–6.
51. Platts-Mills JA, Liu J, Houpt ER. New concepts in diagnostics for infectious diarrhea. Mucosal Immunol 2013;6:876–85.
52. Van Lint P, De Witte E, De Henau H et al. Evaluation of a real-time
multiplex PCR for the simultaneous detection of Campylobacter jejuni,
Salmonella spp., Shigella spp./EIEC, and Yersinia enterocolitica in fecal
samples. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2015;34:535–42.
53. Verkerke HP, Sobuz SU, Petri WA Jr. Molecular diagnosis of infectious
diarrhea: focus on enteric protozoa. Expert Rev Mol Diagn 2014;14:
935–46.
54. Yansouni CP, Merckx J, Libman MD et al. Recent advances in clinical
parasitology diagnostics. Curr Infect Dis Rep 2014;16:434.
55. Gaudreau C, Barkati S, Leduc JM et al. Shigella spp. with reduced azithromycin susceptibility, Quebec, Canada, 2012–2013. Emerg Infect Dis
2014;20:854–6.

© 2016 by the American College of Gastroenterology

56. Peleg I, Givon-Lavi N, Leibovitz E et al. Epidemiological trends and
patterns of antimicrobial resistance of Shigella spp. isolated from stool
cultures in two different populations in Southern Israel. Diagn Microbiol
Infect Dis 2014;78:287–91.
57. Zhang J, Jin H, Hu J et al. Antimicrobial resistance of Shigella spp. from
humans in Shanghai, China, 2004–2011. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis
2014;78:282–6.
58. Mandal J, Sangeetha V, Nivedithadivya D et al. Characterization of
extended-spectrum β -lactamase-producing clinical isolates of Shigella
flexneri. J Health Popul Nutr 2013;31:405–8.
59. Pons MJ, Gomes C, Martinez-Puchol S et al. Antimicrobial resistance in
Shigella spp. causing traveller’s diarrhoea (1995–2010): a retrospective
analysis. Travel Med Infect Dis 2013;11:315–9.
60. Kansakar P, Baral P, Malla S et al. Antimicrobial susceptibilities of enteric
bacterial pathogens isolated in Kathmandu, Nepal, during 2002–2004.
J Infect Dev Ctries 2011;5:163–8.
61. Howie RL, Folster JP, Bowen A et al. Reduced azithromycin susceptibility
in Shigella sonnei, United States. Microb Drug Resist 2010;16:245–8.
62. Wong MR, Reddy V, Hanson H et al. Antimicrobial resistance trends
of Shigella serotypes in New York City, 2006–2009. Microb Drug Resist
2010;16:155–61.
63. Cronquist AB, Mody RK, Atkinson R et al. Impacts of culture-independent diagnostic practices on public health surveillance for bacterial enteric
pathogens. Clin Infect Dis 2012;54:Suppl 5 S432–S439.
64. Maragkoudakis S, Poulidaki SR, Papadomanolaki E et al. Empiric antimicrobial therapy and infectious diarrhea. Do we need local guidelines?
Eur J Intern Med 2011;22:e60–e62.
65. Sjolund Karlsson M, Bowen A, Reporter R et al. Outbreak of infections
caused by Shigella sonnei with reduced susceptibility to azithromycin in
the United States. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2013;57:1559–60.
66. Victora CG, Bryce J, Fontaine O et al. Reducing deaths from diarrhoea
through oral rehydration therapy. Bull World Health Organ 2000;78:
1246–55.
67. Gangarosa RE, Glass RI, Lew JF et al. Hospitalizations involving gastroenteritis in the United States, 1985: the special burden of the disease
among the elderly. Am J Epidemiol 1992;135:281–90.
68. Caeiro JP, DuPont HL, Albrecht H et al. Oral rehydration therapy plus
loperamide versus loperamide alone in the treatment of traveler's diarrhea.
Clin Infect Dis 1999;28:1286–9.
69. Casburn-Jones AC, Farthing MJ. Management of infectious diarrhoea.
Gut 2004;53:296–305.
70. Snyder JD, Molla AM, Cash RA. Home-based therapy for diarrhea.
J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 1990;11:438–47.
71. Wendland BE, Arbus GS. Oral fluid therapy: sodium and potassium
content and osmolality of some commercial “clear” soups, juices and
beverages. Can Med Assoc J 1979;121:564–6.568, 571.
72. Duggan C, Fontaine O, Pierce NF et al. Scientific rationale for a change in
the composition of oral rehydration solution. JAMA 2004;291:2628–31.
73. Baker LB, Jeukendrup AE. Optimal composition of fluid-replacement
beverages. Compr Physiol 2014;4:575–620.
74. Binder HJ, Brown I, Ramakrishna BS et al. Oral rehydration therapy in
the second decade of the twenty-first century. Curr Gastroenterol Rep
2014;16:376.
75. Roberfroid MB. Prebiotics and probiotics: are they functional foods?
Am J Clin Nutr 2000;71:1682S–1687S.discussion 1688S–90S.
76. Dunne C, O'Mahoney L, Murphy L. In vitro selection criteria for propbiotic
bacteria of human origin: correlation with in vivo findings. Am J Clin Nutr
2001;73:3865–925.
77. FAO/WHO. Joint FAO/WHO Working Group Report on Drafting Guidelines for the Evaluation of Probiotics in Food WHO: Geneva, Switzerland,
2002.
78. Gibson GR, Probert HM, Loo JV et al. Dietary modulation of the human
colonic microbiota: updating the concept of prebiotics. Nutr Res Rev
2004;17:259–75.
79. Tojo M, Oikawa T, Morikawa Y et al. The effects of Bifidobacterium breve
administration on Campylobacter enteritis. Acta Pediatr Jpn 2007;29:
160–7.
80. Saavedra JM, Bauman NA, Oung I et al. Feeding of Bifidobacterium
bifidum and Streptococcus thermophilus to infants in hospital for prevention of diarrhoea and shedding of rotavirus. Lancet 1994;344:1046–9.
81. Nemcova R, Bomba A, Gancarcinova S et al. Effects of the administration
of lactobacilli, maltodextrins and fructooligosaccharides upon the adhesion of E-Coli O8: K88 to the intestinal mucosa and organic acid levels in
the gut contents of piglets. Vet Res Commun 2007;31:791–800.
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

617

618

Riddle et al.

Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/ajg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWn
YQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE= on 12/17/2024

82. Power SE, O'Toole PW, Stanton C et al. Intestinal microbiota, diet and
health. Br J Nutr 2014;111:387–402.
83. Allen SJ, Martinez EG, Gregorio GV et al. Probiotics for treating acute
infectious diarrhoea. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010, CD003048.
84. Bruno F, Frigerio G. A new therapeutic alternative for the treatment of
enteritis—controlled double-blind tests with the strain SF 68]. Schweiz
Rundsch Med Prax 1981;70:1717–20.
85. Bruno F, Nastasi A, Bruno M. Double-blind controlled study of the effect
of the lactogenic enterococcus SF68 strain on various enterocolitis
associated manifestations and on salmonella infections. Clin Ter 1983;
105:203–7.
86. Buydens P, Debeuckelaere S. Efficacy of SF 68 in the treatment of acute
diarrhea. A placebo-controlled trial. Scand J Gastroenterol 1996;31:
887–91.
87. Wunderlich PF, Braun L, Fumagalli I et al. Double-blind report on the
efficacy of lactic acid-producing Enterococcus SF68 in the prevention of
antibiotic-associated diarrhoea and in the treatment of acute diarrhoea.
J Int Med Res 1989;17:333–8.
88. Mitra AK, Rabbani GH. A double-blind, controlled trial of bioflorin
(Streptococcus faecium SF68) in adults with acute diarrhea due to
Vibrio cholerae and enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli. Gastroenterology
1990;99:1149–52.
89. Höchter W, Chase D, Hagenhoff G. Saccharomyces boulardii in the
treatment of acute adult diarrhoea. [Saccharomyces boulardii bei acuter
Erwachsenendiarrhoea]. Münchener medizinische Wochenschrift
1990;132:188–92.
90. Lund B, Edlund C. Probiotic Enterococcus faecium strain is a possible
recipient of the vanA gene cluster. Clin Infect Dis 2001;32:1384–5.
91. Szajewska H, Guarino A, Hojsak I et al. Use of probiotics for management
of acute gastroenteritis: a position paper by the ESPGHAN Working Group
for Probiotics and Prebiotics. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2014;58:531–9.
92. Noguera T, Wotring R, Melville CR et al. Resolution of acute gastroenteritis symptoms in children and adults treated with a novel
polyphenol-based prebiotic. World J Gastroenterol 2014;20:12301–7.
93. Souza DN, Jorge MT. The effect of Lactobacillus casei and Bifidobacterium
breve on antibiotic-associated diarrhea treatment: randomized doubleblind clinical trial. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop 2012;45:112–6.
94. Hempel S, Newberry SJ, Maher AR et al. Probiotics for the prevention
and treatment of antibiotic-associated diarrhea: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. JAMA 2012;307:1959–69.
95. DuPont HL, Sullivan P, Pickering LK et al. Symptomatic treatment of
diarrhea with bismuth subsalicylate among students attending a Mexican
university. Gastroenterology 1977;73:715–8.
96. DuPont HL, Ericsson CD, Mathewson JJ et al. Zaldaride maleate, an
intestinal calmodulin inhibitor, in the therapy of travelers’ diarrhea.
Gastroenterology 1993;104:709–15.
97. DiCesare D, DuPont HL, Mathewson JJ et al. A double blind, randomized,
placebo-controlled study of SP-303 (Provir) in the symptomatic treatment
of acute diarrhea among travelers to Jamaica and Mexico. Am J Gastroenterol 2002;97:2585–8.
98. DuPont HL. Bismuth subsalicylate in the treatment and prevention of
diarrheal disease. Drug Intell Clin Pharm 1987;21:687–93.
99. Macarthur RD, Hawkins TN, Brown SJ et al. Efficacy and safety of
crofelemer for noninfectious diarrhea in HIV-seropositive individuals
(ADVENT trial): a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled,
two-stage study. HIV Clin Trials 2013;14:261–73.
100. Shook JE, Burks TF, Wasley JW et al. Novel calmodulin antagonist CGS
9343B inhibits secretory diarrhea. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1989;251:247–52.
101. Okhuysen PC, DuPont HL, Ericsson CD et al. Zaldaride maleate (a new
calmodulin antagonist) versus loperamide in the treatment of traveler’s
diarrhea: randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Clin Infect Dis 1995;21:
341–4.
102. Siberschmidt G, Schick MT, Steffen R et al. Treatment of travellers’
diarrhoea: zaldaride compared with loperamide and placebo. Eur J
Gastroenterol Hep 1995;7:871–5.
103. Primi MP, Bueno L, Baumer P et al. Racecadotril demonstrates intestinal
antisecretory activity in vivo. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 1999;13 Suppl 6:
3–7.
104. Salazar-Lindo E, Santisteban-Ponce J, Chea-Woo E et al. Racecadotril
in the treatment of acute watery diarrhea in children. N Engl J Med
2000;343:463–7.
105. Wang HH, Shieh MJ, Liao KF. A blind, randomized comparison of
racecadotril and loperamide for stopping acute diarrhea in adults. World J
Gastroenterol 2005;11:1540–3.
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

106. Schiller LR, Santa Ana CA, Morawski SG et al. Mechanism of the antidiarrheal effect of loperamide. Gastroenterology 1984;86:1475–80.
107. Stoll R, Ruppin H, Domschke W. Calmodulin-mediated effects of
loperamide on chloride transport by brush border membrane vesicles
from human ileum. Gastroenterology 1988;95:69–76.
108. Johnson PC, Ericsson CD, DuPont HL et al. Comparison of loperamide
with bismuth subsalicylate for the treatment of acute travelers’ diarrhea.
JAMA 1986;255:757–60.
109. Kaplan MA, Prior MJ, McKonly KI et al. A multicenter randomized
controlled trial of a liquid loperamide product versus placebo in the treatment of acute diarrhea in children. Clin Pediatr (Phila) 1999;38:579–91.
110. Hanauer SB, DuPont HL, Cooper KM et al. Randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled clinical trial of loperamide plus simethicone versus loperamide alone and simethicone alone in the treatment of acute diarrhea with
gas-related abdominal discomfort. Curr Med Res Opin 2007;23:1033–43.
111. Riddle MS, Arnold S, Tribble DR. Effect of adjunctive loperamide in
combination with antibiotics on treatment outcomes in traveler’s diarrhea:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Infect Dis 2008;47:1007–14.
112. DuPont HL, Hornick RB. Adverse effect of lomotil therapy in shigellosis.
JAMA 1973;226:1525–8.
113. Koo HL, Koo DC, Musher DM et al. Antimotility agents for the treatment
of Clostridium difficile diarrhea and colitis. Clin Infect Dis 2009;48:598–605
114. DuPont HL, Ericsson CD, DuPont MW et al. A randomized, open-label
comparison of nonprescription loperamide and attapulgite in the
symptomatic treatment of acute diarrhea. Am J Med 1990;88:20S–23S.
115. Portnoy BL, DuPont HL, Pruitt D et al. Antidiarrheal agents in the
treatment of acute diarrhea in children. JAMA 1976;236:844–6.
116. De Bruyn G, Hahn S, Borwick A. Antibiotic treatment for travellers'
diarrhoea. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2000;3:CD002242.
117. Dupont HL, Cooperstock M. Cmea evaluation of new anti-infective
drugs for the treatment of acute infectious diarrhea. Clin Infect Dis
1992;15:S228–S235.
118. Adachi JA, Ericsson CD, Jiang ZD et al. Azithromycin found to be
comparable to levofloxacin for the treatment of US travelers with
acute diarrhea acquired in Mexico. Clin Infect Dis 2003;37:1165–71.
119. Ericsson CD, Johnson PC, Dupont HL et al. Ciprofloxacin or trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole as initial therapy for travelers diarrhea—a placebocontrolled, randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 1987;106:216–20.
120. Ericsson CD, DuPont HL, Mathewson JJ. Optimal dosing of ofloxacin
with loperamide in the treatment of non-dysenteric travelers’ diarrhea.
J Travel Med 2001;8:207–9.
121. Salam I, Katelaris P, Leigh-Smith S et al. Randomised trial of single-dose
ciprofloxacin for travellers’ diarrhoea. Lancet 1994;344:1537–9.
122. Mattila L, Peltola H, Siitonen A et al. Short-term treatment of traveler’s
diarrhea with norfloxacin: a double-blind, placebo-controlled study
during two seasons. Clin Infect Dis 1993;17:779–82.
123. EFSA (European Food Safety Authority) and ECDC (European Centre for
Disease Prevention and Control), 2013. The European Union Summary
Report on antimicrobial resistance in zoonotic and indicator bacteria
from humans, animals and food in 2011. EFSA J 2013;11:3196–555.
124. Ruiz J, Marco F, Oliveira I et al. Trends in antimicrobial resistance in
Campylobacter spp. causing traveler’s diarrhea. APMIS 2007;115:218–24.
125. Bennish ML, Salam MA, Khan WA et al. Treatment of shigellosis: III.
Comparison of one- or two-dose ciprofloxacin with standard 5-day
therapy. A randomized, blinded trial. Ann Intern Med 1992;117:727–34.
126. Hoge CW, Gambel JM, Srijan A et al. Trends in antibiotic resistance
among diarrheal pathogens isolated in Thailand over 15 years. Clin Infect
Dis 1998;26:341–5.
127. Kuschner RA, Trofa AF, Thomas RJ et al. Use of azithromycin for the
treatment of Campylobacter Enteritis in travelers to Thailand, an area
where ciprofloxacin resistance is prevalent. Clin Infect Dis 1995;21:536–41.
128. Wistrom JJM, Hedstrom S, Alesig K et al. Short-term self-treatment
of travellers’ diarrhea with norfloxacin: a placebo-controlled study.
J Antimicrob Chemother 1989;23:905–13.
129. Dupont HL, Ericsson C, Mathewson J et al. Five versus three daysof
ofloxacin therapy for traveler’s diarrhea: a placebo-controlled study.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1992;36:87–91.
130. Wistrom JGL, Palmgren A, Price M et al. Ecological effects of short term
ciprofloxacin treatment of travelers’ diarrheoa. J Antimicrob Chemother
1992;30:693–706.
131. Taylor DN, Bourgeois AL, Ericsson CD et al. A randomized, doubleblind, multicenter study of rifaximin compared with placebo and with
ciprofloxacin in the treatment of travelers' diarrhea. Am J Trop Med Hyg
2006;74:1060–6.

VOLUME 111 | MAY 2016 www.amjgastro.com

Clinical Guideline: Acute Diarrheal Infections

Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/ajg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWn
YQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE= on 12/17/2024

132. Pepin J, Saheb N, Coulombe MA et al. Emergence of fluoroquinolones
as the predominant risk factor for Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea:
a cohort study during an epidemic in Quebec. Clin Infect Dis 2005;41:
1254–60.
133. Shiferaw B, Solghan S, Palmer A et al. Antimicrobial susceptibility patterns
of Shigella isolates in Foodborne Diseases Active Surveillance Network
(FoodNet) sites, 2000–2010. Clin Infect Dis 2012;54:Suppl 5 S458–S463.
134. Christopher PR, David KV, John SM et al. Antibiotic therapy for Shigella
dysentery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010, CD006784.
135. Sanders JW, Frenck RW, Putnam SD et al. Azithromycin and loperamide
are comparable to levofloxacin and loperamide for the treatment of
traveler’s diarrhea in United States military personnel in Turkey. Clin Infect
Dis 2007;45:294–301.
136. Tribble DR, Sanders JW, Pang LW et al. Traveler's diarrhea in Thailand:
randomized, double-blind trial comparing single-dose and 3-day azithromycin-based regimens with a 3-day levofloxacin regimen. Clin Infect Dis
2007;44:338–46.
137. Gomi H, Jiang ZD, Adachi JA et al. In vitro antimicrobial susceptibility
testing of bacterial enteropathogens causing traveler’s diarrhea in four
geographic regions. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2001;45:212–6.
138. Khan IA, Schwartzman JD, Matsuura T et al. A dichotomous role for
nitric oxide during acute Toxoplasma gondii infection in mice. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 1997;94:13955–60.
139. Ouyang-Latimer J, Jafri S, VanTassel A et al. In vitro antimicrobial susceptibility of bacterial enteropathogens isolated from international travelers
to Mexico, Guatemala, and India from 2006 to 2008. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 2011;55:874–8.
140. DuPont HL, Jiang ZD, Ericsson CD et al. Rifaximin versus ciprofloxacin
for the treatment of traveler’s diarrhea: a randomized, double-blind
clinical trial. Clin Infect Dis 2001;33:1807–15.
141. Infante RM, Ericsson CD, Jiang ZD et al. Enteroaggregative Escherichia
coli diarrhea in travelers: response to rifaximin therapy. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2004;2:135–8.
142. Dupont HL, Jiang Z-D, Ericsson CD et al. Rifaximin versus ciprofloxacin
for the treatment of travelers’ diarrhea: a randomized, double-blind
clinical trial. Clin Infect Dis 2001;33:1807–15.
143. Steffen R, Sack DA, Riopel L et al. Therapy of travelers’ diarrhea with
rifaximin on various continents. Am J Gastroenterol 2003;98:1073–8.
144. Safdar N, Said A, Gangnon RE et al. Risk of hemolytic uremic syndrome
after antibiotic treatment of Escherichia coli O157:H7 enteritis: a metaanalysis. JAMA 2002;288:996–1001.
145. Musher DM, Rubenstein AD. Permanent carriers of nontyphosa
salmonellae. Arch Intern Med 1973;132:869–72.
146. Norman FF, Perez-Molina J, Perez de Ayala A et al. Clostridium difficileassociated diarrhea after antibiotic treatment for traveler’s diarrhea.
Clin Infect Dis 2008;46:1060–3.
147. Kantele A, Laaveri T, Mero S et al. Antimicrobials increase travelers’ risk
of colonization by extended-spectrum betalactamase-producing Enterobacteriaceae. Clin Infect Dis 2015;60:837–46.
148. Connor BA, Keystone JS. Antibiotic self-treatment of travelers’ diarrhea:
helpful or harmful? Clin Infect Dis 2015;60:847–8.
149. Granados CE, Reveiz L, Uribe LG et al. Drugs for treating giardiasis.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2012;12:CD007787.
150. Solaymani-Mohammadi S, Genkinger JM, Loffredo CA et al. A metaanalysis of the effectiveness of albendazole compared with metronidazole
as treatments for infections with Giardia duodenalis. PLoS Negl Trop Dis
2010;4:e682.
151. Haque R, Huston CD, Hughes M et al. Amebiasis. N Engl J Med 2003;348:
1565–73.
152. Mackey-Lawrence NM, Petri WA Jr. Amoebic dysentery. BMJ Clin Evid
2011;2011.
153. Bobak DA. Use of nitazoxanide for gastrointestinal tract infections: treatment of protozoan parasitic infection and beyond. Curr Infect Dis Rep
2006;8:91–5.
154. Fung HB, Doan TL. Tinidazole: a nitroimidazole antiprotozoal agent.
Clin Ther 2005;27:1859–84.
155. Ortega YR, Sanchez R. Update on Cyclospora cayetanensis, a food-borne
and waterborne parasite. Clin Microbiol Rev 2010;23:218–34.
156. Connor BA. Chronic diarrhea in travelers. Curr Infect Dis Rep 2013;15:
203–10.
157. Hines J, Nachamkin I. Effective use of the clinical microbiology laboratory
for diagnosing diarrheal diseases. Clin Infect Dis 1996;23:1292–301.
158. Operario DJ, Houpt E. Defining the causes of diarrhea: novel approaches.
Curr Opin Infect Dis 2011;24:464–71.

© 2016 by the American College of Gastroenterology

159. Fujioka M, Kasai K, Miura T et al. Rapid diagnostic method for the detection of diarrheagenic Escherichia coli by multiplex PCR. Jpn J Infect Dis
2009;62:476–80.
160. Couturier MR, Lee B, Zelyas N et al. Shiga-toxigenic Escherichia coli
detection in stool samples screened for viral gastroenteritis in Alberta,
Canada. J Clin Microbiol 2011;49:574–8.
161. Wolk DM, Schneider SK, Wengenack NL et al. Real-time PCR method
for detection of encephalitozoonintestinalis from stool specimens. J Clin
Microbiol 2002;40:3922–8.
162. Amar CF, East C, Maclure E et al. Blinded application of microscopy,
bacteriological culture, immunoassays and PCR to detect gastrointestinal
pathogens from faecal samples of patients with community-acquired
diarrhoea. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2004;23:529–34.
163. Wahnschaffe U, Ignatius R, Loddenkemper C et al. Diagnostic value of
endoscopy for the diagnosis of giardiasis and other intestinal diseases
in patients with persistent diarrhea from tropical or subtropical areas.
Scand J Gastroenterol 2007;42:391–6.
164. Marshall JB, Singh R, Diaz-Arias AA. Chronic, unexplained diarrhea:
are biopsies necessary if colonoscopy is normal? Am J Gastroenterol
1995;90:372–6.
165. Patel Y, Pettigrew NM, Grahame GR et al. The diagnostic yield of lower
endoscopy plus biopsy in nonbloody diarrhea. Gastrointest Endosc
1997;46:338–43.
166. Lee JH, Rhee PL, Kim JJ et al. The role of mucosal biopsy in the diagnosis
of chronic diarrhea: value of multiple biopsies when colonoscopic finding
is normal or nonspecific. Korean J Intern Med 1997;12:182–7.
167. Shah RJ, Fenoglio-Preiser C, Bleau BL et al. Usefulness of colonoscopy
with biopsy in the evaluation of patients with chronic diarrhea. Am J
Gastroenterol 2001;96:1091–5.
168. Fine KD, Seidel RH, Do K. The prevalence, anatomic distribution, and
diagnosis of colonic causes of chronic diarrhea. Gastrointest Endosc
2000;51:318–26.
169. da Silva JG, De Brito T, Cintra Damiao AO et al. Histologic study of
colonic mucosa in patients with chronic diarrhea and normal colonoscopic findings. J Clin Gastroenterol 2006;40:44–8.
170. Committee ASoP. Shen B, Khan K et al. The role of endoscopy in the
management of patients with diarrhea. Gastrointest Endosc 2010;71:
887–92.
171. Shale MJ, Walters JR, Westaby D. Adequacy of flexible sigmoidoscopy
with biopsy for diarrhea in patients under age 50 without features of
proximal disease. Gastrointest Endosc 2011;73:757–64.
172. Schussele Filliettaz S, Juillerat P, Burnand B et al. Appropriateness of
colonoscopy in Europe (EPAGE II). Chronic diarrhea and known
inflammatory bowel disease. Endoscopy 2009;41:218–26.
173. Adler A, Roll S, Marowski B et al. Appropriateness of colonoscopy in the
era of colorectal cancer screening: a prospective, multicenter study in
a private-practice setting (Berlin Colonoscopy Project 1, BECOP 1).
Dis Colon Rectum 2007;50:1628–38.
174. Agnarsdottir M, Gunnlaugsson O, Orvar KB et al. Collagenous and
lymphocytic colitis in Iceland. Dig Dis Sci 2002;47:1122–8.
175. de Bosset V, Froehlich F, Rey JP et al. Do explicit appropriateness criteria
enhance the diagnostic yield of colonoscopy? Endoscopy 2002;34:360–8.
176. Duncan JE, Sweeney WB, Trudel JL et al. Colonoscopy in the elderly:
low risk, low yield in asymptomatic patients. Dis Colon Rectum 2006;49:
646–51.
177. Fernandez-Banares F, Salas A, Forne M et al. Incidence of collagenous and
lymphocytic colitis: a 5-year population-based study. Am J Gastroenterol
1999;94:418–23.
178. Gonvers JJ, Harris JK, Wietlisbach V et al. A European view of diagnostic
yield and appropriateness of colonoscopy. Hepatogastroenterology 2007;
54:729–35.
179. Lasson A, Kilander A, Stotzer PO. Diagnostic yield of colonoscopy based
on symptoms. Scand J Gastroenterol 2008;43:356–62.
180. Lieberman DA, de Garmo PL, Fleischer DE et al. Colonic neoplasia in
patients with nonspecific GI symptoms. Gastrointest Endosc 2000;51:
647–51.
181. Matteoni CA, Wang N, Goldblum JR et al. Flexible sigmoidoscopy for the
detection of microscopic colitis. Am J Med 2000;108:416–8.
182. Morini S, Hassan C, Meucci G et al. Diagnostic yield of open access
colonoscopy according to appropriateness. Gastrointest Endosc 2001;54:
175–9.
183. Offner FA, Jao RV, Lewin KJ et al. Collagenous colitis: a study of the
distribution of morphological abnormalities and their histological
detection. Hum Pathol 1999;30:451–7.
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

619

620

Riddle et al.

Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/ajg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWn
YQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE= on 12/17/2024

184. Olesen M, Eriksson S, Bohr J et al. Microscopic colitis: a common diarrhoeal disease. An epidemiological study in Orebro, Sweden, 1993–1998.
Gut 2004;53:346–50.
185. Pardi DS, Loftus EVJr., Smyrk TC et al. The epidemiology of microscopic
colitis: a population based study in Olmsted County, Minnesota. Gut
2007;56:504–8.
186. Yusoff IF, Ormonde DG, Hoffman NE. Routine colonic mucosal biopsy
and ileoscopy increases diagnostic yield in patients undergoing colonoscopy for diarrhea. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2002;17:276–80.
187. Connor BA. Sequelae of traveler’s diarrhea: focus on postinfectious
irritable bowel syndrome. Clin Infect Dis 2005;41:Suppl 8 S577–S586.
188. Shlim DR. Looking for evidence that personal hygiene precautions
prevent traveler’s diarrhea. Clin Infect Dis 2005;41:Suppl 8 S531–S535.
189. Tafuri S, Guerra R, Gallone MS et al. Effectiveness of pre-travel consultation in the prevention of travel-related diseases: a retrospective cohort
study. Travel Med Infect Dis 2014;12:745–9.
190. Wikswo ME, Hall AJ et al. Centers for Disease C. Outbreaks of acute
gastroenteritis transmitted by person-to-person contact—United States,
2009–2010. MMWR Surveill Summ 2012;61:1–12.
191. DuPont HL. Acute infectious diarrhea in immunocompetent adults.
N Engl J Med 2014;370:1532–40.
192. DuPont HL, Formal SB, Hornick RB et al. Pathogenesis of Escherichia coli
diarrhea. N Engl J Med 1971;285:1–9.
193. Nataro JP, Deng Y, Cookson S et al. Heterogeneity of enteroaggregative
Escherichia coli virulence demonstrated in volunteers. J Infect Dis
1995;171:465–8.
194. Steinmann J, Paulmann D, Becker B et al. Comparison of virucidal
activity of alcohol-based hand sanitizers versus antimicrobial hand soaps
in vitro and in vivo. J Hosp Infect 2012;82:277–80.
195. Liu P, Yuen Y, Hsiao HM et al. Effectiveness of liquid soap and hand
sanitizer against Norwalk virus on contaminated hands. Appl Environ
Microbiol 2010;76:394–9.
196. Horvath LL, Murray CK, Dooley DP. Effect of maximizing a travel
medicine clinic’s prevention strategies. J Travel Med 2005;12:332–7.
197. Luby SP, Agboatwalla M, Painter J et al. Combining drinking water treatment and hand washing for diarrhoea prevention, a cluster randomised
controlled trial. Trop Med Int Health 2006;11:479–89.
198. Luby SP, Agboatwalla M, Painter J et al. Effect of intensive handwashing
promotion on childhood diarrhea in high-risk communities in Pakistan:
a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2004;291:2547–54.
199. Kamm KB, Feikin DR, Bigogo GM et al. Associations between presence of
handwashing stations and soap in the home and diarrhoea and respiratory
illness, in children less than five years old in rural western Kenya. Trop
Med Int Health 2014;19:398–406.
200. Hubner NO, Hubner C, Wodny M et al. Effectiveness of alcohol-based
hand disinfectants in a public administration: impact on health and
work performance related to acute respiratory symptoms and diarrhoea.
BMC Infect Dis 2010;10:250.
201. Boulware DR. Influence of hygiene on gastrointestinal illness among
wilderness backpackers. J Travel Med 2004;11:27–33.
202. Heywood AE, Zhang M, MacIntyre CR et al. Travel risk behaviours and
uptake of pre-travel health preventions by university students in Australia.
BMC Infect Dis 2012;12:43.
203. Yanni EA, Marano N, Han P et al. Knowledge, attitudes, and practices
of US travelers to Asia regarding seasonal influenza and H5N1 avian
influenza prevention measures. J Travel Med 2010;17:374–81.
204. Namikawa K, Iida T, Ouchi K et al. Knowledge, attitudes, and practices
of Japanese travelers on infectious disease risks and immunization uptake.
J Travel Med 2010;17:171–5.
205. Hartjes LB, Baumann LC, Henriques JB. Travel health risk perceptions
and prevention behaviors of US study abroad students. J Travel Med
2009;16:338–43.
206. Steffen R, Connor BA. Vaccines in travel health: from risk assessment to
priorities. J Travel Med 2005;12:26–35.
207. DuPont HL, Ericsson CD, Johnson PC et al. Prevention of travelers’ diarrhea
by the tablet formulation of bismuth subsalicylate. Jama 1987;257:1347–50.
208. DuPont HL, Sullivan P, Evans DG et al. Prevention of traveler’s diarrhea
(emporiatric enteritis). Prophylactic administration of subsalicylate
bismuth). JAMA 1980;243:237–41.
209. Steffen R, DuPont HL, Heusser R et al. Prevention of traveler’s diarrhea by
the tablet form of bismuth subsalicylate. Antimicrob Agents Chemother
1986;29:625–7.
210. Graham DY, Estes MK, Gentry LO. Double-blind comparison of
bismuth subsalicylate and placebo in the prevention and treatment of
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli-induced diarrhea in volunteers. Gastroenterology 1983;85:1017–22.
211. Manhart MD. In vitro antimicrobial activity of bismuth subsalicylate and
other bismuth salts. Rev Infect Dis 1990;12:Suppl 1 S11–S15.
212. Ward RL, Sander DS, Knowlton DR. In vitro activities of bismuth salts
against rotaviruses and other enteric viruses. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1985;27:306–8.
213. Bagchi D, McGinn TR, Ye X et al. Mechanism of gastroprotection by
bismuth subsalicylate against chemically induced oxidative stress in
cultured human gastric mucosal cells. Dig Dis Sci 1999;44:2419–28.
214. Copeman M, Matuz J, Leonard AJ et al. The gastroduodenal mucus barrier and its role in protection against luminal pepsins: the effect of 16,16
dimethyl prostaglandin E2, carbopol-polyacrylate, sucralfate and bismuth
subsalicylate. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 1994;9:Suppl 1 S55–S59.
215. DuPont HL, Ericsson CD, Farthing MJ et al. Expert review of the evidence
base for prevention of travelers’ diarrhea. J Travel Med 2009;16:149–60.
216. Mendelowitz PC, Hoffman RS, Weber S. Bismuth absorption and
myoclonic encephalopathy during bismuth subsalicylate therapy.
Ann Intern Med 1990;112:140–1.
217. Sazawal S, Hiremath G, Dhingra U et al. Efficacy of probiotics in
prevention of acute diarrhoea: a meta-analysis of masked, randomised,
placebo-controlled trials. Lancet Infect Dis 2006;6:374–82.
218. McFarland LV. Meta-analysis of probiotics for the prevention of traveler’s
diarrhea. Travel Med Infect Dis 2007;5:97–105.
219. Kollaritsch H, Wiedermann G. Prevention of Traveler’s Diarrhea: A
Double-Blind Randomized Trial with Saccharomyces cerevisiae Hansen
CBS 5926. In: Steffen R et al. (eds). Proceedings of the First Conference
on International Travel Medicine, Zürich, Switzerland, 5–8 April 1988.
Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1989, pp 328–56.
220. Kollaritsch H, Holst H, Grobara P et al. Prevention of travelers’ diarrhea
with Saccharomyces boulardii: results of a placebo controlled double-blind
study. Fortschr Med 1993;111:152–6.
221. Oksanen PJ, Salminen S, Saxelin M et al. Prevention of travellers’
diarrhoea by Lactobacillus GG. Ann Med 1990;22:53–6.
222. Hilton E, Kolakowski P, Singer C et al. Efficacy of Lactobacillus GG as a
diarrheal preventive in travelers. J Travel Med 1997;4:41–3.
223. De dios Pozo-Olano J, Warram JJ, Gomez R et al. Effect of Lactobacilli
preparation on travelers’ diarrhea. Gastroenterology 1978;74:829–30.
224. Katelaris PH, Salam I, Farthing MJ. Lactobacilli to prevent traveler’s
diarrhea? N Engl J Med 1995;333:1360–1.
225. Drakoularakou A, Tzortzis G, Rastall RA et al. A double-blind, placebocontrolled, randomized human study assessing the capacity of a novel
galacto-oligosaccharide mixture in reducing travellers' diarrhoea. Eur J
Clin Nutr 2010;64:146–52.
226. Virk A, Mandrekar J, Berbari EF et al. A randomized, double blind,
placebo-controlled trial of an oral synbiotic (AKSB) for prevention of
travelers' diarrhea. J Travel Med 2013;20:88–94.
227. Briand V, Buffet P, Genty S et al. Absence of efficacy of nonviable Lactobacillus
acidophilus for the prevention of traveler’s diarrhea: a randomized,
double-blind, controlled study. Clin Infect Dis 2006;43:1170–5.
228. Levine MM, Hornick RB. Lactulose therapy in Shigella carrier state and
acute dysentery. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1975;8:581–4.
229. Krokowicz L, Kaczmarek BF, Krokowicz P et al. Sodium butyrate and
short chain fatty acids in prevention of travellers’ diarrhoea: a randomized
prospective study. Travel Med Infect Dis 2014;12:183–8.
230. Tzortzis G. Development and functional properties of Bimuno: a secondgeneration prebiotic mixture. Food Sci Technol Bull 2010;6:81–9.
231. National Institutes of Health. NIH Consensus Development Conference.
Travelers’ diarrhea. JAMA 1985;253:2700–4.
232. Reves RR, Johnson PC, Ericsson CD et al. A cost-effectiveness comparison of the use of antimicrobial agents for treatment or prophylaxis of
travelers’ diarrhea. Arch Intern Med 1988;148:2421–7.
233. Thomson MA, Booth IW. Treatment of traveller’s diarrhoea. Economic
aspects. Pharmacoeconomics 1996;9:382–91.
234. DuPont HL. New insights and directions in travelers’ diarrhea. Gastroenterol Clin N Am 2006;35:337–53.viii-ix.
235. Gorbach SL. How to hit the runs for fifty million travelers at risk.
Ann Intern Med 2005;142:861–2.
236. Hill DR, Ericsson CD, Pearson RD et al. The practice of travel medicine:
guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis
2006;43:1499–539.
237. Halvorson HA, Schlett CD, Riddle MS. Postinfectious irritable bowel
syndrome—a meta-analysis. Am J Gastroenterol 2006;101:1894–9.quiz
1942

VOLUME 111 | MAY 2016 www.amjgastro.com

Clinical Guideline: Acute Diarrheal Infections

Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/ajg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWn
YQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE= on 12/17/2024

238. Thabane M, Kottachchi DT, Marshall JK. Systematic review and metaanalysis: the incidence and prognosis of post-infectious irritable bowel
syndrome. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2007;26:535–44.
239. Schwille-Kiuntke J, Mazurak N, Enck P. Systematic review with metaanalysis: post-infectious irritable bowel syndrome after travellers’
diarrhoea. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2015;41:1029–37.
240. Alajbegovic S, Sanders JW, Atherly DE et al. Effectiveness of rifaximin
and fluoroquinolones in preventing travelers’ diarrhea (TD): a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Syst Rev 2012;1:39.
241. DuPont HL, Jiang ZD, Okhuysen PC et al. Antibacterial chemoprophylaxis in the prevention of traveler’s diarrhea: evaluation of poorly absorbed
oral rifaximin. Clin Infect Dis 2005;41 Suppl 8:S571–S576.
242. Armstrong AW, Ulukan S, Weiner M et al. A randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled study evaluating the efficacy and safety of rifaximin for
the prevention of travelers’ diarrhea in US military personnel deployed to
Incirlik Air Base, Incirlik, Turkey. J Travel Med 2010;17:392–4.
243. Flores J, Dupont HL, Jiang ZD et al. A randomized, double-blind,
pilot study of rifaximin 550 mg versus placebo in the prevention of

travelers’ diarrhea in Mexico during the dry season. J Travel Med
2011;18:333–6.
244. Zanger P, Nurjadi D, Gabor J et al. Effectiveness of rifaximin in prevention
of diarrhoea in individuals travelling to south and southeast Asia:
a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet
Infect Dis 2013;13:946–54.
245. Taylor DN, McKenzie R, Durbin A et al. Rifaximin, a nonabsorbed oral
antibiotic, prevents shigellosis after experimental challenge. Clin Infect
Dis 2006;42:1283–8.
246. Batz MB, Henke E, Kowalcyk B. Long-term consequences of foodborne
infections. Infect Dis Clin N Am 2013;27:599–616.
247. Pandey P, Bodhidatta L, Lewis M et al. Travelers’ diarrhea in Nepal:
an update on the pathogens and antibiotic resistance. J Travel Med
2011;18:102–8.
248. Vlieghe ER, Jacobs JA, Van Esbroeck M et al. Trends of norfloxacin and
erythromycin resistance of Campylobacter jejuni/Campylobacter coli
isolates recovered from international travelers, 1994 to 2006. J Travel Med
2008;15:419–25.

APPENDIX 1
Search Strategy

Ovid MEDLINE(R) 1946 to February Week 3 2015, searched on 18 February 2015.
1. Diarrhea/
2. Acute Disease/
3. 1 and 2
4. Dysentery/
5. Gastroenteritis/
6. 4 or 5
7. 1 and 6
8. 2 and 7
9. “acute”.tw.
10. 7 and 9
11. 8 or 10
12. 3 or 11
13. Acute infectious diarrh*.tw.
14. Travel* diarrh*.tw.
15. Postinfectious irritable bowel syndrome.tw.
16. Acute enteric infection.tw.
17. Acute infectious gastroenteritis.tw.
18. Infectious diarrh*.tw.
19. (Acute or chronic or severe or persistent).tw.
20. 18 and 19
21. or/13–17
22. 12 or 20 or 21
23. Limit 22 to “all child (0 to 18 years)”
24. 22 not 23
25. Limit 24 to case reports
26. 24 not 25
27. Limit 26 to english language
28. Limit 27 to last 10 years
29. Limit 28 to humans
Ovid MEDLINE(R) In-Process and Other Non-Indexed Citations, searched on 18 February 2015.
1. Acute infectious diarrh*.tw.
2. Travel* diarrh*.tw.
3. Postinfectious irritable bowel syndrome.tw.
4. Acute enteric infection.tw.
© 2016 by the American College of Gastroenterology

The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

621

622

Riddle et al.

Downloaded from http://journals.lww.com/ajg by BhDMf5ePHKav1zEoum1tQfN4a+kJLhEZgbsIHo4XMi0hCywCX1AWn
YQp/IlQrHD3i3D0OdRyi7TvSFl4Cf3VC4/OAVpDDa8K2+Ya6H515kE= on 12/17/2024

5. Acute infectious gastroenteritis.tw.
6. Infectious diarrh*.tw.
7. (Acute or chronic or severe or persistent).tw.
8. 6 and 7
9. or/1–5
10. 8 or 9
11. (Child* or infan* or p?ediatric).tw.
12. 10 not 11
13. Limit 12 to english language
14. Limit 13 to last 10 years
Embase 1974 to 2015 February 18 (Ovid), searched on 18 February 2015
1. Acute diarrhea/
2. Infectious diarrhea/
3. Dysentery/
4. Acute gastroenteritis/
5. 1 or 2
6. 3 or 4
7. 5 and 6
8. Acute infectious diarrh*.tw.
9. Travel* diarrh*.tw.
10. Post infectious irritable bowel syndrome.tw.
11. Acute enteric infection.tw.
12. Acute infectious gastroenteritis.tw.
13. Infectious diarrh*.tw.
14. (Acute or chronic or severe or persistent).tw.
15. 13 and 14
16. or/8–12
17. 5 or 7 or 15 or 16
18. Limit 17 to (embryo or infant or child or preschool child <1 to 6 years> or school child <7 to 12 years> or adolescent <13 to 17 years>)
19. 17 not 18
20. Limit 19 to english language
21. Limit 20 to exclude medline journals
22. Limit 21 to last 10 years
23. “case report”.mp.
24. 22 not 23
25. Limit 24 to human
26. (Child* or infan* or p?ediatric).tw.
27. 25 not 26

The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

VOLUME 111 | MAY 2016 www.amjgastro.com

