Gastroenterology 2024;167:1033–1045

CLINICAL PRACTICE UPDATES
AGA Clinical Practice Update on Pregnancy-Related
Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease: Expert Review
Shivangi Kothari,1 Yalda Afshar,2 Lawrence S. Friedman,3,4,5,6 and Joseph Ahn7

DESCRIPTION: The purpose of this American Gastroenterological Association (AGA) Institute Clinical Practice Update is to
review the available published evidence and expert advice
regarding the clinical management of patients with pregnancyrelated gastrointestinal and liver disease. METHODS: This
expert review was commissioned and approved by the AGA
Institute Clinical Practice Updates Committee and the AGA
Governing Board to provide timely guidance on a topic of high
clinical importance to the AGA membership and underwent
internal peer review by the Clinical Practice Updates Committee and external peer review through the standard procedures
of Gastroenterology. This article provides practical advice for
the management of pregnant patients with gastrointestinal and
liver disease based on the best available published evidence.
The Best Practice Advice statements were drawn from a review
of the published literature and from expert opinion. Because
formal systematic reviews were not performed, these Best
Practice Advice statements do not carry formal ratings
regarding the quality of evidence or strength of the presented
considerations.
BEST PRACTICE ADVICE STATEMENTS
BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 1: To optimize gastrointestinal and
liver disease before pregnancy, preconception and contraceptive care counseling by a multidisciplinary team should be
encouraged for reproductive-aged persons who desire to
become pregnant. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 2: Procedures,
medications, and other interventions to optimize maternal
health should not be withheld solely because a patient is
pregnant and should be individualized after an assessment of
the risks and beneﬁts. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 3: Coordination of birth for a pregnant patient with complex inﬂammatory
bowel disease, advanced cirrhosis, or a liver transplant should
be managed by a multidisciplinary team, preferably in a tertiary
care center. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 4: Early treatment of
nausea and vomiting of pregnancy may reduce progression to
hyperemesis gravidarum. In addition to standard diet and
lifestyle measures, stepwise treatment consists of symptom
control with vitamin B6 and doxylamine, hydration, and
adequate nutrition; ondansetron, metoclopramide, promethazine, and intravenous glucocorticoids may be required in
moderate to severe cases. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 5: Constipation in pregnant persons may result from hormonal,
medication-related, and physiological changes. Treatment options include dietary ﬁber, lactulose, and polyethylene glycol–

based laxatives. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 6: Elective endoscopic procedures should be deferred until the postpartum
period, whereas nonemergent but necessary procedures should
ideally be performed in the second trimester. Pregnant patients
with cirrhosis should undergo evaluation for, and treatment of,
esophageal varices; upper endoscopy is suggested in the second
trimester (if not performed within 1 year before conception) to
guide consideration of nonselective b-blocker therapy or
endoscopic variceal ligation. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 7: In
patients with inﬂammatory bowel disease, clinical remission
before conception, during pregnancy, and in the postpartum
period is essential for improving outcomes of pregnancy. Biologic agents should be continued throughout pregnancy and the
postpartum period; use of methotrexate, thalidomide, and
ozanimod must be stopped at least 6 months before conception.
BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 8: Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography during pregnancy may be performed for
urgent indications, such as choledocholithiasis, cholangitis, and
some cases of gallstone pancreatitis. Ideally, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography should be performed during
the second trimester, but if deferring the procedure may be
detrimental to the health of the patient and fetus, a multidisciplinary team should be convened to decide on the advisability
of endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography. BEST
PRACTICE ADVICE 9: Cholecystectomy is safe during pregnancy; a laparoscopic approach is the standard of care
regardless of trimester, but ideally in the second trimester.
BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 10: The diagnosis of intrahepatic
cholestasis of pregnancy is based on a serum bile acid level
>10 mmol/L in the setting of pruritus, typically during the
second or third trimester. Treatment should be offered with
oral ursodeoxycholic acid in a total daily dose of 10–15 mg/kg.
BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 11: Management of liver diseases
unique to pregnancy, such as pre-eclampsia; hemolysis,
elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets syndrome; and acute
fatty liver of pregnancy requires planning for delivery and
timely evaluation for possible liver transplantation. Daily
aspirin prophylaxis for patients at risk for pre-eclampsia or
hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets syndrome
is advised beginning at week 12 of gestation. BEST PRACTICE
ADVICE 12: In patients with chronic hepatitis B virus infection,
serum hepatitis B virus DNA and liver biochemical test levels
should be ordered. Patients not on treatment but with a serum
hepatitis B virus DNA level >200,000 IU/mL during the third
trimester of pregnancy should be considered for treatment with
tenofovir disoproxil fumarate. BEST PRACTICE ADVICE 13: In

CLINICAL PRACTICE UPDATES

1
Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Rochester, Rochester, New York; 2Division of Maternal Fetal
Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California; 3Department of Medicine, Newton-Wellesley Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts; 4Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; 5Department of
Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; 6Department of Medicine, Tufts University School of Medicine,
Boston, Massachusetts; and 7Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland,
Oregon

1034 Kothari et al
patients on immunosuppressive therapy for chronic liver diseases or after liver transplantation, therapy should be
continued at the lowest effective dose during pregnancy.
Mycophenolate mofetil should not be administered during
pregnancy.

Keywords: Pregnancy; Liver Disease; Endoscopy; Vomiting; Inﬂammatory Bowel Disease.

Preconception and Contraceptive
Counseling

CLINICAL PRACTICE UPDATES

Best Practice Advice 1: To optimize gastrointestinal and liver disease before pregnancy, preconception
and contraceptive care counseling by a multidisciplinary team should be encouraged for reproductiveaged persons who desire to become pregnant.
In the United States, more than one-half of all pregnancies are unplanned.1 Unplanned pregnancies are associated
with increased risks to the pregnant person and fetus.
Pregnant persons with some gastrointestinal (GI) and liver
diseases are considered to have high-risk pregnancies, and
an unplanned pregnancy increases the risk further. When
possible, the patient’s health should be optimized before
pregnancy. The risk to the pregnancy depends on the underlying GI or liver disease, and pregnancy may affect the
course of the GI or liver disease. Therefore, preconception
preparation requires collaboration among all of the relevant
providers who care for a person of reproductive age. The
goal is to reduce potential harm to the mother and fetus by
identifying modiﬁable risk factors and intervening to
improve the health of the mother and child while considering the mother’s preferences.2
A discussion of the patient’s reproductive plans should
be incorporated into the clinical encounter with a
reproductive-aged person with active GI or liver issues that
can be affected by pregnancy (and vice versa) and include
consideration of contraception if the person is trying to
avoid a pregnancy, ways to optimize health before pregnancy occurs, and the optimal timing of pregnancy. Preconception counseling can be done collaboratively with the
patient’s primary care physician, gastroenterologist, hepatologist, and obstetrician or maternal-fetal medicine (MFM)
physician. Issues discussed may include medical and surgical management of the underlying disease, genetic testing,
artiﬁcial reproductive technologies (if relevant), family
planning, and contraceptive care. Preconception visits allow
risk stratiﬁcation and optimization of the management of
medical illnesses to achieve a safe pregnancy.

Risk Mitigation
Best Practice Advice 2: Procedures, medications,
and other interventions to optimize maternal health
should not be withheld solely because a patient is
pregnant and should be individualized after an assessment of the risks and beneﬁts.

Gastroenterology Vol. 167, Iss. 5

Pregnancy-related morbidity and mortality are increasing
in the United States,3 particularly for pregnancies that are
considered high risk because of chronic or newly diagnosed
medical comorbidities. Recognizing a worsening disease
course, triaging the level of maternal health, and prescribing
appropriate medication and interventions are essential.4
Risk mitigation for high-risk pregnancies may include
medications, procedures, and other interventions that may
have unknown effects on the pregnancy or the fetus. Often,
no data exist on teratogenicity and other risks of a speciﬁc
intervention because of the difﬁculty conducting large-scale
randomized studies in this population. Many interventions
will warrant a discussion of safety in the pregnant person
and fetus. In general, most interventions, including computed
tomography or endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), should not be withheld if deemed necessary.

Coordination of Birth
Best Practice Advice 3: Coordination of birth for a
pregnant patient with complex inﬂammatory bowel disease, advanced cirrhosis, or a liver transplant should be
managed by a multidisciplinary team, preferably in a
tertiary care center.
Some GI and liver diseases may place patients at an
increased risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes, including
miscarriages, preterm birth, hypertensive disease of pregnancy, and cesarean birth.5,6 Patients with moderate- or
high-risk GI or liver disease should ideally be managed
throughout the pregnancy (ie, prenatal care), during delivery, and in the postpartum period at centers with multidisciplinary teams that have experience treating high-risk
diseases in a pregnant person. Pregnant patients with GI
and liver diseases should be cared for by subspecialists in
gastroenterology, obstetrics, and MFM. Throughout the
pregnancy, the team should conduct collaborative discussions related to birth planning, birth location, mode of delivery, and gestational age, as well as medical and surgical
interventions that may be needed.

Heartburn, Nausea, and Vomiting
Best Practice Advice 4: Early treatment of nausea
and vomiting of pregnancy may reduce progression to
hyperemesis gravidarum. In addition to standard diet
and lifestyle measures, stepwise treatment consists of
symptom control with vitamin B6 and doxylamine, hydration, and adequate nutrition; ondansetron, metoclopramide, promethazine, and intravenous glucocorticoids
may be required in moderate to severe cases.
Abbreviations used in this paper: ACOG, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists; AFLP, acute fatty liver of pregnancy; anti-TNF,
anti-tumor necrosis factor; ERCP, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; GD, gallstone disease; GI, gastrointestinal; HBV,
hepatitis B virus; HG, hyperemesis gravidarum; IBD, inﬂammatory bowel
disease; IV, intravenous; MFM, maternal-fetal medicine; NVP, nausea and
vomiting of pregnancy.
Most current article
© 2024 by the AGA Institute.
0016-5085/$36.00
https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2024.06.014

October 2024

AGA Clinical Practice Update on Pregnancy-Related GI and Liver Disease 1035

Table 1.Motherisk Pregnancy-Unique Quantiﬁcation of Emesis Score
Motherisk Pregnancy-Unique Quantiﬁcation of Emesis scorea
1

2

3

4

5

Not at all

1

2–3

4–6

>6

I have not thrown up at all

1–2

3–4

5–6

7

None

1–2

3–4

5–6

7

Variable
In the past 12 h:
How long (h) have you felt nauseated or sick to
your stomach?
How many times have you thrown up or
vomited?
How many times have you had retching or dry
heaves without throwing up?

Adapted from Am J Obstet Gynecol, Vol. 186, Iss. 5, Suppl. 2, Koren G, Boskovic R, Hard M, et al, Motherisk–PUQE
(pregnancy-unique quantiﬁcation of emesis and nausea) scoring system for nausea and vomiting of pregnancy, S228–S231,
2002, with permission from Elsevier.
a
Maximum score ¼ 15; severity: 6 ¼ mild, 7–12 ¼ moderate, 13 ¼ severe.

are administered routinely in pregnancy. Proton pump inhibitors, such as omeprazole or pantoprazole, can be
considered if lifestyle modiﬁcations and antacids fail to
alleviate symptoms. In a meta-analysis of 26 studies evaluating the risk of adverse neonatal outcomes associated with
maternal intake of proton pump inhibitors, no signiﬁcant
associations between proton pump inhibitor use and abortion, stillbirth, neonatal death, preterm birth, and low birth
weight were observed, although a nonsigniﬁcant increase in
the risk of congenital malformations was reported in 1
study.16

Hyperemesis Gravidarum
HG is an intractable form of NVP that can lead to
dehydration, weight loss of >5% of prepregnancy weight,
and electrolyte imbalances.17 It can affect 0.3%–2% of
pregnant persons. HG usually starts before week 22 of
gestation. By week 16, symptoms resolve in >50% of
affected persons and by 20 weeks, 80% improve; however,
in 10%, symptoms persist throughout pregnancy and occasionally into the postpartum period.
The cause of HG is not fully understood, but HG has been
associated with hyperthyroid disorders; elevated levels of
human chorionic gonadotropin and estrogen; previous
molar pregnancy; psychiatric illness; pre-existing conditions,
such as diabetes mellitus and asthma; singleton female
pregnancies; and pregnancies with multiple male fetuses.18
In a meta-analysis, HG was associated with a higher female
to male ratio of offspring and a higher frequency of low birth
weight, small for gestational age, and premature delivery.19
In a recent report, higher growth or differentiation factor15 (a hormone acting on the brainstem that is produced by
the fetus) levels in maternal blood were found to be associated with vomiting in pregnancy and HG.20
The evaluation of HG involves comprehensive history
taking, including any previous pregnancies (patients with HG
have a higher risk in subsequent pregnancy) and any preexisting conditions. Physical examination is focused on an
evaluation of signs of dehydration (eg, orthostatic hypotension, decreased skin turgor, and dry mucus membranes) and

CLINICAL PRACTICE UPDATES

Heartburn, nausea, and vomiting are common during
pregnancy, with frequency ranging from 30%–90%.7–9
Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy (NVP) usually begins at
4–6 weeks,10 peaks at 8–12 weeks, and subsides by week 20.7
Heartburn is common in the latter part of the pregnancy and
resolves after delivery.11 Heartburn during pregnancy can be
attributed to an increase in levels of progesterone, which
causes relaxation of the lower esophageal sphincter, thereby
facilitating gastroesophageal reﬂux.8 NVP, however, is
commonly associated with elevated levels of human chorionic gonadotropin and estrogen and changes in GI motility.
Progesterone can have an inhibitory effect on GI and small
bowel motility and lead to delayed gastric emptying. The
severity of vomiting during pregnancy can be quantiﬁed with
a scoring system, such as the Motherisk Pregnancy Unique
Quantiﬁcation of Emesis score (Table 1).12
Diet and lifestyle modiﬁcation are the initial steps in
managing these symptoms in pregnancy. Reducing spicy,
fatty, acidic, and fried foods can help to reduce heartburn.
Eating small, frequent, and bland meals, for example, the
BRAT (bananas, rice, applesauce, and toast) diet, and highprotein and low-fat meals can also be helpful in NVP.13
Speciﬁc triggers, such as certain foods with strong odors
or activities, should be identiﬁed and avoided. If symptoms
are persistent or severe, therapeutic options include ginger
(a 250-mg capsule 4 times daily) and vitamin B6 (pyridoxine, 10–25 mg every 8 hours), as recommended by the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(ACOG).14
H1-receptor antagonists, such as doxylamine, promethazine, and dimenhydrinate, are considered safe ﬁrst-line
pharmacologic antiemetic therapies, if needed. Doxylamine
is US Food and Drug Administration–approved and recommended by ACOG for persistent NVP refractory to nonpharmacologic therapy.14 Doxylamine and pyridoxine are
available in 10 mg/10 mg and 20 mg/20 mg combinations
and are safe and well tolerated.15 Early intervention and
treatment of NVP may help prevent progression to hyperemesis gravidarum (HG).14
H2-receptor blockers are the most used antireﬂux
medications during pregnancy. Cimetidine and famotidine

1036 Kothari et al

CLINICAL PRACTICE UPDATES

malnutrition (weight loss and muscle wasting). Neurologic
evaluation for neuropathy or vitamin deﬁciency should be
carried out. Laboratory evaluation is focused on the extent of
dehydration, nutritional or vitamin deﬁciencies, and electrolyte imbalances. Elevated levels of liver enzymes can be seen
in 40%–50% of patients with HG.21 Ultrasonography of the
abdomen can help detect multiple or molar pregnancies and
adequate fetal growth, and also help to rule out hepatobiliary,
vascular, or renal explanations for the symptoms, such as
gallstones and portal vein thrombosis.
The goals of management of HG are prevention of
dehydration; correction of electrolyte abnormalities; and
support of adequate maternal and, thereby fetal, nutrition.
Treatment is guided by the severity of symptoms and may
require a multidisciplinary team approach involving obstetricians, nutritionists, psychologists, and gastroenterologists. Mental health care professionals can help manage
anxiety, depression, and other emotional challenges associated with HG. Supplementation with vitamin B6 (pyridoxine) may be suggested as a ﬁrst-line treatment for mild
cases. Vitamin B1 (thiamine) is given to prevent refeeding
syndrome and Wernicke encephalopathy; thiamine therapy
should be started at a dosage of 100 mg daily for a minimum
of 7 days, followed by a maintenance dosage of 50 mg daily
until adequate oral intake is established.
ACOG recommends a step-up approach for patients who
do not respond to ﬁrst-line therapy. Metoclopramide can be
given for NVP and HG. In a randomized study comparing
promethazine and metoclopramide, both drugs had similar
efﬁcacy in patients who were hospitalized for HG; however,
drowsiness, dizziness, dystonia, and discontinuation of
therapy owing to adverse events were less frequent with
metoclopramide.22 No increased risk of congenital defects
has been reported with metoclopramide.23 Ondansetron is
given primarily in severe NVP that requires hospitalization,
and has not been associated with an increased risk of stillbirth, spontaneous abortion, or major birth defects; however,
some studies have reported cases of congenital heart defects
when ondansetron is given in the ﬁrst trimester, and thus it
should only be administered as a second-line therapy.24
ACOG recommends using ondansetron on a case-by-case
basis in patients with persistent symptoms before 10 weeks
of pregnancy.14 In a Cochrane review and meta-analysis of 25
studies, no signiﬁcant difference was seen in efﬁcacy among
the medications administered commonly for HG (ie, metoclopramide, ondansetron, and promethazine).25 Recently
published European Association for the Study of the Liver
Clinical Practice Guidelines on the management of liver diseases in pregnancy recommended doxylamine and pyridoxine and phenothiazines as ﬁrst-line pharmacologic treatment
of HG and metoclopramide and ondansetron as second-line
therapies. They also noted that drug-induced extrapyramidal adverse effects may be seen with phenothiazines and
metoclopramide and recommended that the drug be withdrawn in patients reporting such symptoms.21
Methylprednisolone can be given as a last resort in patients with severe HG and reduces the rate of rehospitalization. It is given in a dosage of 16 mg intravenous (IV)
every 8 hours for up to 3 days, followed by tapering over 2

Gastroenterology Vol. 167, Iss. 5

weeks to the lowest effective dosage and limiting the
maximum duration to 6 weeks.14 Its administration in the
ﬁrst trimester has been reported to slightly increase the risk
of cleft palate when given before 10 weeks of gestation;
however, the data have been conﬂicting and, therefore, it
should be administered with caution in the ﬁrst trimester.
Patients with severe symptoms may need hospitalization for
IV hydration and replacement of electrolytes, vitamins, and
nutrients. If weight loss and symptoms persist, enteral or
parenteral nutrition may be required.

Constipation
Best Practice Advice 5: Constipation in pregnant
persons may result from hormonal, medication-related,
and physiological changes. Treatment options include
dietary ﬁber, lactulose, and polyethylene glycol–based
laxatives.
Constipation may be experienced by 20%–40% of
pregnant persons.26,27 It usually improves in the postpartum period.28 Hemorrhoids occur in approximately 80%
of pregnant persons, more commonly during the third
trimester due to compression of the rectum by the gravid
uterus. Constipation during pregnancy can be attributed to
physiological, medication, anatomic, dietary, metabolic, and
hormonal changes.29 The increased levels of progesterone
can slow GI motility. Evaluation involves detailed history
taking regarding the frequency and consistency of bowel
movements, presence of pain or bleeding during bowel
movements, and severity of symptoms. Hemorrhoids can
present with itching, pain, or bleeding.
Dietary ﬁber intake during pregnancy in the United States
is low30 and, therefore, increasing dietary ﬁber intake (eg,
fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and legumes) to the recommended daily amount of approximately 30 g/d can help promote regular bowel movements and prevent constipation.
Consumption of an adequate amount of ﬂuids, particularly
water, can help soften stools and ease bowel movements. Bulkforming agents, such as psyllium husk or methylcellulose, are
safe to administer in pregnancy because of the lack of systemic
absorption. Soluble ﬁber, like psyllium husk, improves stool
viscosity and transit time in addition to increasing bulk
compared with insoluble ﬁber, which is exclusively bulkforming. Osmotic laxatives, such as polyethylene glycol or
lactulose, can also be administered safely during pregnancy.31
Excessive ﬁber and osmotic laxatives like lactulose can cause
maternal bloating. Stimulant laxatives should be avoided
because safety data on these medications are conﬂicting. In a
prospective study of 204 patients treated with hydrocortisone
foam for hemorrhoids in the third trimester, no adverse events
were seen compared with placebo.32 Encouraging pregnant
women to avoid straining during bowel movements by
providing ample time, using relaxation techniques, and
adjusting diet and hydration is helpful.

Endoscopy
Best Practice Advice 6: Elective endoscopic procedures should be deferred until the postpartum

AGA Clinical Practice Update on Pregnancy-Related GI and Liver Disease 1037

period, whereas nonemergent but necessary procedures should ideally be performed in the second
trimester. Pregnant patients with cirrhosis should undergo evaluation for, and treatment of, esophageal
varices; upper endoscopy is suggested in the second
trimester (if not performed within 1 year before
conception) to guide consideration of nonselective bblocker therapy or endoscopic variceal ligation.
GI endoscopy is considered to be safe; however, when
performed during pregnancy, endoscopy necessitates additional considerations. Routine screening or surveillance colonoscopy should be deferred until after delivery, but in
cases with a strong suspicion of a colonic mass or severe
diarrhea, sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy may be considered.
Because esophageal varices can worsen during pregnancy,
pregnant patients with cirrhosis or noncirrhotic portal hypertension should undergo evaluation for, and treatment of,
esophageal varices. Upper endoscopy is suggested in the
second trimester (if not performed within 1 year before
conception) to guide consideration of nonselective b-blocker
therapy or endoscopic variceal ligation.
Endoscopy is contraindicated in cases of placental
abruption, imminent birth, ruptured membranes, or hypertensive disease of pregnancy.33 The use of sedation or
anesthesia during endoscopy raises risks of adverse effects
on the fetus. Placental blood ﬂow is linked directly to
maternal blood pressure and oxygenation, and oversedation
causing maternal hypotension and/or hypoxia can lead to
decreased placental blood ﬂow and fetal hypoxia, leading to
fetal distress and possible demise. Propofol, fentanyl, and
midazolam have not been associated with congenital malformations. An ACOG guidance has stated that there is no
anesthetic agent used currently that has been found to have
any teratogenic effect when given in standard concentrations at any gestational age.34 When moderate sedation is
required, the American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy recommends meperidine as the preferred agent, followed by small doses of midazolam as needed, but attempts
should be made to limit the use of midazolam during the
ﬁrst trimester. When deep sedation is needed, administration by an experienced anesthesiologist is advised.33 ACOG
also advises fetal heart rate monitoring, depending on
gestational age, facility type, and nature of the surgery, as
monitoring may assist in maternal positioning and cardiopulmonary management.
Most sedatives are short-acting and safe for use during
lactation. Once a postpartum patient has recovered from
sedation and is alert and awake, breastfeeding can be
resumed without the need to pump and discard.35
Nonurgent but nonelective endoscopic procedures can
generally be postponed until after the ﬁrst trimester. Elective procedures should be delayed until after delivery to
limit maternal and fetal risks. If the condition poses a signiﬁcant risk to the mother, or if emergent endoscopic
intervention is required, endoscopy can be performed at any
gestational age. Patients should be kept in the left pelvic tilt
or left lateral position to facilitate uterine displacement to
the left side and minimize aortocaval compression, decrease
the risk of hypotension, and maintain cardiac return.36 A

gravid uterus can lead to compression of the aorta or inferior vena cava and decrease venous return, causing
placental hypoperfusion and fetal hypoxia (“supine hypotension syndrome”).36 After 20 weeks of gestation, patients
should not lie supine during an endoscopic procedure.33
When cautery is used during an endoscopic procedure, the
grounding pad should be placed on the leg or on the right
shoulder or arm to prevent the conduction of electrical
current through the amniotic ﬂuid. Bipolar cautery is preferable to prevent currents from reaching the fetus.

Inﬂammatory Bowel Disease
Best Practice Advice 7: In patients with inﬂammatory bowel disease, clinical remission before
conception, during pregnancy, and in the postpartum
period is essential for improving outcomes of pregnancy. Biologic agents should be continued throughout
pregnancy and the postpartum period; use of methotrexate, thalidomide, and ozanimod must be stopped at
least 6 months before conception.
Inﬂammatory bowel disease (IBD) usually affects young
persons of reproductive age; approximately 50% of patients
are diagnosed before aged 30 years. Pregnancy can impact
the clinical course of IBD, and management of IBD during
pregnancy requires multidisciplinary care and close
collaboration among the gastroenterologist, obstetrician,
and patient. The importance and beneﬁt of achieving
adequate disease control before and during pregnancy and
the potential risks of medications should be discussed. The
AGA IBD Parenthood Project Working Group has recommended consultation with an MFM specialist, if available, for
every pregnant patient with IBD.6
Persons with IBD have an increased risk of preterm birth,
low birth weight, fetal growth retardation, hypertensive disease of pregnancy, and cesarean birth in the setting of active
disease.37,38 Conception in the setting of disease remission has
similar outcomes and relapse rates as those for nonpregnant
persons with IBD. Fertility rates of patients with ulcerative
colitis without prior intestinal surgery are similar to those in
persons who do not have IBD.39 In patients who have undergone total colectomy with a J-pouch ileoanal anastomosis,
fertility can be affected by pelvic adhesions, which cause fallopian tube obstruction. Therefore, persons waiting to complete their families are advised to either avoid pelvic dissection
or undergo subtotal colectomy with a Hartmann pouch and
end-ileostomy or ileorectal anastomosis.
The Pregnancy in Inﬂammatory Bowel Disease and
Neonatal Outcomes registry reported a higher rate of
exacerbation during pregnancy in patients with ulcerative
colitis than in those with Crohn’s disease.40 During pregnancy, symptoms of IBD can overlap with those seen
routinely in pregnancy, and the evaluation of IBD during
pregnancy involves a multidisciplinary approach. The evaluation may include endoscopic procedures, such as unsedated ﬂexible sigmoidoscopy (which is preferred to
colonoscopy), to assess disease activity and extent in patients with ulcerative colitis. These procedures should be
considered if they are critical to medical decision making.

CLINICAL PRACTICE UPDATES

October 2024

1038 Kothari et al

CLINICAL PRACTICE UPDATES

Screening for active disease in all pregnant women with
IBD can be performed by checking fecal calprotectin level at
preconception, during each trimester, and after delivery.41 A
fecal calprotectin cutoff level of 200 mg/mg has a positive
predictive value of 67%–74% for disease activity.42 Ultrasonography or magnetic resonance imaging without gadolinium (gadolinium should be avoided during pregnancy)
may be needed to rule out other causes of the patient’s
symptoms. Intestinal ultrasound is a new, safe, and noninvasive modality that can be used to assess disease extent
and activity and evaluate treatment response in pregnant
patients with IBD. It has been reported to distinguish active
from quiescent disease with 84% sensitivity and 98%
speciﬁcity. It is feasible throughout pregnancy; however,
visualization of the terminal ileum and sigmoid colon decreases in the third trimester.43
The approach to managing an IBD ﬂare during pregnancy is similar to that for nonpregnant persons. Individualized medication plans should be developed, considering
the risks and beneﬁts of various treatment options.
Conception during remission and maintaining remission
through pregnancy and postpartum period are essential.
The use of mesalamine is considered safe during pregnancy.
Sulfasalazine use should be supplemented with 1 mg folic
acid taken 2 times daily 3 months before conception and
during pregnancy to avoid fetal neural tube defects. Results
of a meta-analysis evaluating mesalamine, sulfasalazine,
balsalazide, and olsalazine during pregnancy showed that
the medications were not associated with an increased risk
of congenital malformations, premature births, stillbirths,
spontaneous abortions, or low birth weight.44
More recent studies have reported that 6mercaptopurine and azathioprine are safe for use in pregnancy, and no major congenital anomalies have been reported with their use; however, 60% of newborns can have
anemia.40,45 Methotrexate is contraindicated for use in
pregnancy and, given its long half-life, its use should be
discontinued at least 6 months before conception.46
Biologic agents, such as anti-tumor necrosis factor (antiTNF) agents, during pregnancy can be continued to maintain
remission. Inﬂiximab and adalimumab cross the placenta after
20 weeks of gestation and thus do not interfere with organogenesis. Certolizumab does not cross the placenta. If patients
have received anti-TNF medications (eg, inﬂiximab and adalimumab) after 20 weeks of gestation, then the newborn should
not receive any live vaccines for the ﬁrst 6 months due to
immunosuppression from the medications that may have
crossed the placenta. Anti-TNF medications do not increase the
risk of pregnancy complications and have been found to lead to
fewer neonatal complications, thereby supporting the need for
maintaining remission of disease during pregnancy. Data on
the safety of vedolizumab are limited. Various studies and the
Pregnancy in Inﬂammatory Bowel Disease and Neonatal Outcomes registry have not reported an increased risk of
congenital anomalies, delayed infant growth, developmental
problems, or miscarriage with anti-TNF medication use.40,46,47
The dose of a biologic agent, especially inﬂiximab, does not
change with pregnancy and is continued based on prepregnancy weight to maintain the patient in remission. Results of a

Gastroenterology Vol. 167, Iss. 5

recent meta-analysis showed that the frequency of adverse
outcomes among pregnant patients with IBD on biologics was
comparable with that in the general population.48 Metronidazole can be given in cases of pouchitis, perianal Crohn’s
disease, or intra-abdominal abscesses resulting from ﬁstulizing Crohn’s disease. Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid is safe and can
also be administered during pregnancy. Glucocorticoids are
given frequently for IBD ﬂares and, in contrast to prior reports,
newer studies and the Pregnancy in Inﬂammatory Bowel
Disease and Neonatal Outcomes registry have reported that
glucocorticoids do not pose a teratogenic risk of orofacial cleft
in the fetus.40,49 Nevertheless, glucocorticoids have been reported to increase the risk of preterm birth, small for gestational age, low birth weight, intrauterine growth restriction,
and neonatal intensive care unit admission, and should be
given with caution in the ﬁrst trimester.50 Thalidomide and
ozanimod should be avoided during pregnancy due to potential adverse effects.
Pregnant persons with IBD may require additional
nutritional support, particularly if intestinal malabsorption
or nutrient deﬁciencies are present. Consultation with a
registered dietitian specializing in IBD can help ensure
adequate nutrient intake. Most IBD medications are safe for
use during breastfeeding.
The mode of delivery of the fetus should be planned.
Vaginal birth should be avoided in patients with active perianal Crohn’s disease, perianal abscess, or active rectal disease.
Patients with prior complex ﬁstulizing disease and a J-pouch
should also be considered for cesarean birth to minimize the
risk of instrumentation of the perineal region, avoid injury to
the anal sphincter, and preserve continence.42,51

Endoscopic Retrograde
Cholangiopancreatography
Best Practice Advice 8: Endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopancreatography during pregnancy may be performed for urgent indications, such as choledocholithiasis,
cholangitis, and some cases of gallstone pancreatitis.
Ideally, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
should be performed during the second trimester, but if
deferring the procedure may be detrimental to the health
of the patient and fetus, a multidisciplinary team should
be convened to decide on the advisability of endoscopic
retrograde cholangiopancreatography.
Gallstone disease (GD) affects a substantial proportion of
women during pregnancy. Ultrasonography is the imaging
modality of choice for gallstones. Although computed tomography can be performed when medically indicated,
computed tomography does involve radiation and is not
typically needed for gallstone evaluation. In cases of suspected choledocholithiasis, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography, which does not require contrast, can
be performed. Endoscopic ultrasound can also be done in
cases of suspected choledocholithiasis if the patient cannot
undergo magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography to
conﬁrm the absence of a bile duct stone and can obviate the
need for ERCP. Optimal management of bile duct obstruction by gallstones requires a multidisciplinary team that

AGA Clinical Practice Update on Pregnancy-Related GI and Liver Disease 1039

includes an advanced endoscopist experienced in ERCP,
MFM physician, neonatologist, obstetrician, and anesthesiologist. Initial management may include IV hydration,
symptom control, antibiotics, and nutritional support.
When indicated, ERCP can be performed during pregnancy to manage choledocholithiasis, cholangitis, and acute
biliary pancreatitis with a retained bile duct stone. Minimizing fetal radiation and pre- and postprocedure fetal
monitoring is required. A Nationwide Readmission Database
reported that pregnant patients with acute biliary pancreatitis were less likely to undergo laparoscopic cholecystectomy or ERCP compared with nonpregnant age-matched
cohorts, and ERCP, when performed, reduced the odds of
early readmission by 60%.52 In a study of 68 ERCPs in
pregnant women, technical outcomes were uniformly
favorable; however, patients undergoing ERCP in the ﬁrst
trimester had relatively poor fetal outcomes, including a low
rate of term pregnancies (73.3%), high rate of low-weight
newborns (21.4%), and high risk of preterm delivery
(20%).53 Therefore, the American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy guidelines recommend deferral of endoscopy to the second trimester, whenever possible.33
Pregnancy has been reported to be an independent risk
factor for post-ERCP pancreatitis. A 2016 national cohort
study comparing pregnant women with a large control
group of nonpregnant women undergoing ERCP found that,
although there was no signiﬁcant difference in the frequencies of ERCP-related complications (perforation, infection, or hemorrhage), the rate of post-ERCP pancreatitis was
greater in pregnant women (12% vs 5%; P < .001).54 Also
the risk of post-ERCP pancreatitis was higher in nonteaching
vs teaching hospitals (14.6% vs 9.6%; P < .001), therefore,
if possible, these patients should be transferred to a tertiary
care setting for treatment management by an experienced
endoscopist and for multidisciplinary care.
Another major concern with ERCP in a pregnant person is
minimizing fetal radiation exposure. Total fetal radiation
exposure can be inﬂuenced by gestational age, body size, and
fetal exposure and results mainly from radiation scatter within
the pregnant patient’s body. Fetal and gonadal shielding is no
longer recommended by the American Association of Physicists in Medicine because the beneﬁts of shielding are minimal
and it may compromise the study if the shield enters the examination ﬁeld.55 The fetal teratogenic threshold dose is
considered to be 50 mGy, and detrimental outcomes are usually seen with a dose >100 mGy.33 Various measures should be
taken to minimize radiation exposure to mother and fetus
(Table 2).56 During ERCP, the patient can be placed in the supine or prone position in the ﬁrst trimester; however, in the
second and third trimesters, the patient should be kept in the
left pelvic tilt or left lateral position to avoid compression of the
aorta or inferior vena cava. Thromboprophylaxis and antibiotic
prophylaxis should be administered, when indicated.

Gallstone Disease
Best Practice Advice 9: Cholecystectomy is safe
during pregnancy; a laparoscopic approach is the
standard of care regardless of trimester, but ideally in
the second trimester.

Table 2.Measures to Minimize Fetal Radiation During
Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography
Measure
1. A multidisciplinary team with obstetrician, perinatologist or
MFM, radiation safety ofﬁcer, obstetrical anesthesiologist, and
endoscopist with experience performing ERCP and use of
radiation in pregnant persons
2. Use of a modern ﬂuoroscopy unit with collimation ability and
pulsed ﬂuoroscopy
3. Use of last image hold feature and short taps of ﬂuoroscopy
4. Avoidance of spot ﬁlms and use of magniﬁcation
5. Use of image intensiﬁer as close to the patient as possible with
the patient kept away from the radiation source
6. Use of low radiation dose protocols and low frame rates
7. Use of the bile aspiration technique, cholangioscopy, or
endoscopic ultrasound to reduce radiation during cannulation
and clearance during ERCP
8. If large stones are present in the in bile duct, consideration of
placing a stent and planning lithotripsy and stone clearance
after delivery
9. Avoidance of pelvic and gonadal shielding because radiation
from newer ﬂuoroscopy machines may penetrate lead and
thereby inadvertently increase radiation exposure

GD is the second leading cause (after acute appendicitis)
of nonobstetric acute abdominal pain during pregnancy and
can cause signiﬁcant morbidity and mortality.57–59 The
timing of surgical intervention should be evaluated carefully. Elective surgery is usually avoided in the ﬁrst and
third trimesters and is ideally performed in the second
trimester to reduce the risk of spontaneous abortion and
preterm labor, respectively. The traditional approach to
management of GD in pregnancy has been conservative,
with supportive care consisting of IV hydration; symptom
control; and avoidance of dietary triggers, such as high-fat
meals; however, studies have reported that recurrent
biliary symptoms develop in 60% of pregnant patients with
GD treated conservatively, leading to a high number of
emergency department visits and hospitalizations.60 Patients treated conservatively are more likely to undergo
cesarean birth. To minimize the risk of complications,
laparoscopic cholecystectomy is considered superior to
conservative management in the ﬁrst or second trimester
for patients with symptomatic cholelithiasis.61 Sameadmission cholecystectomy in pregnant patients with
acute biliary pancreatitis has been found to reduce the odds
of early readmission by 85%.52 For biliary pain presenting
late in the third trimester, postponing surgical intervention
until delivery may be reasonable, if postponement does not
pose a risk to maternal or fetal health.
In patients with acute cholecystitis, initial management
includes IV hydration, symptom control with analgesia and
antiemetics, and antibiotics. The standard approach is
laparoscopic cholecystectomy. In a study of 1245 pregnant
women with biliary pancreatitis, a signiﬁcantly higher
30-day readmission rate was seen in patients who did not
undergo index cholecystectomy (33.7% vs 5.3%; P < .01);

CLINICAL PRACTICE UPDATES

October 2024

1040 Kothari et al

there was no signiﬁcant difference in the risk of premature
delivery and abortion in the cholecystectomy group, and
patients who underwent cholecystectomy during the index
hospitalization had a signiﬁcantly lower mean number of
cumulative hospitalizations.62 If a patient is hemodynamically unstable, not responding to medical management, or at
high risk for surgery, percutaneous cholecystostomy tube
placement or percutaneous gallbladder aspiration can be
used as “bridging” therapy in the ﬁrst (to the second)
trimester or in the third trimester to the postpartum period,
when cholecystectomy can be performed.63,64 Despite the
longstanding belief that laparoscopic cholecystectomy is
safest during the second trimester with regard to fetal loss
and risk of anesthesia, increasing evidence has supported
the safety of laparoscopic cholecystectomy in the ﬁrst and
third trimesters, and the Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons guidelines stated that laparoscopy can be performed safely during any trimester of
pregnancy.65 The Society of American Gastrointestinal and
Endoscopic Surgeons guidelines recommended that after
the ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy, patients should be placed in
the left lateral or partial left lateral decubitus position for
laparoscopy to minimize compression of the inferior vena
cava.

Liver Diseases in Pregnancy

CLINICAL PRACTICE UPDATES

Liver diseases in pregnancy represent not only preexisting liver conditions, but also those acquired and those
that are unique to pregnancy. In this Clinical Practice Update, we will brieﬂy review liver disease in pregnancy. For
detailed information on the management of these diseases,
various society guidelines are available and should be
reviewed.21,66

Intrahepatic Cholestasis of Pregnancy
Best Practice Advice 10: The diagnosis of intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy is based on a serum
bile acid level >10 mmol/L in the setting of pruritus,
typically during the second or third trimester. Treatment should be offered with oral ursodeoxycholic acid
in a total daily dose of 10–15 mg/kg.
Mild elevations in alkaline phosphatase levels are
common in pregnancy during the second and third
trimester.66–68 Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy is
diagnosed on the basis of clinical presentation of pruritus in
the second and third trimester with a total serum bile acid
level >10 mmol/L. Most cases present in the third trimester
with mild to moderately elevated serum aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase levels (up to
10–20 times the upper limit of normal), and a serum total
bilirubin level <6 mg/dL. If serum bile acid levels are
normal, testing should be repeated after other causes of
pruritus are excluded, including biliary obstruction, viral
hepatitis, and chronic liver disease. Serum bile acid levels
correlate with the risk of intrauterine fetal demise, with the
highest risk in patients with levels 100 mmol/L.69 Treatment should begin with ursodeoxycholic acid in a daily
divided dosage to total of 10–15 mg/kg/d. Ursodeoxycholic

Gastroenterology Vol. 167, Iss. 5

acid has been reported to improve pruritus, serum bile acid
levels, and serum alanine aminotransferase levels, and in a
recent meta-analysis were found to decrease adverse outcomes, including preterm birth and stillbirth.70,71 Additional
treatment of pruritus can be attempted with cholestyramine
and rifampicin. Delivery is advised to be based on serum
total bile acid levels. When 100 mmol/L, the Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine recommends delivery at 36 weeks
or at diagnosis if after 36 weeks. If levels are <100 mmol/L,
delivery is recommended at 36 or 39 weeks of gestation if
diagnosed later. As per the European Association for the
Study of the Liver guidelines, consider early delivery in
patients with bile acids >100 mmol/L, as the risk of stillbirth increases in this group after 35 weeks.21 Management
should be individualized, and delivery at term should be
considered for those with total bile acid levels <40 mmol/
L.72,73 Pruritus typically resolves after delivery, but if it
persists after 6 weeks, further evaluation for underlying
chronic liver disease should be pursued.

Other Liver Diseases Unique to Pregnancy
Best Practice Advice 11: Management of liver diseases unique to pregnancy, such as pre-eclampsia; hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets
syndrome; and acute fatty liver of pregnancy requires
planning for delivery and timely evaluation for possible
liver transplantation. Daily aspirin prophylaxis for patients at risk for pre-eclampsia or hemolysis, elevated
liver enzymes, and low platelets syndrome is advised
beginning at week 12 of gestation.
For liver diseases unique to pregnancy, speciﬁcally preeclampsia; hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low
platelets syndrome; acute fatty liver of pregnancy (AFLP);
and intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy, management
converges on appropriate and expeditious childbirth. Distinguishing among these conditions can be difﬁcult, and the
clinician can focus on supportive care and management of
concomitant comorbidities, such as hypertension; coagulopathy; seizures; and other symptoms, while preparing the
patient for childbirth. Liver biopsy to make a speciﬁc diagnosis is rarely needed and should not be obtained unless it
will affect management. Liver transplantation evaluation
should be considered in patients who progress to acute liver
failure, especially those with suspected AFLP who have
already given birth but do not improve clinically.66–68,74
Systematic studies and meta-analyses have reported the
beneﬁt of low-dose aspirin on lowering the risks of fetal
growth restriction and fetal demise in patients with preeclampsia.75,76 Aspirin in a dosage of 81 mg/d beginning at
weeks 12–16 of gestation and continuing until delivery
should be considered in patients with risk factors for preeclampsia (ie, prior pre-eclampsia, multiple gestation, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, chronic kidney disease, or
autoimmune disease).77 The diagnosis of AFLP is suggested
by the Swansea criteria78,79; however, the Swansea criteria
have limitations in differentiating AFLP from other causes of
liver diseases unique to pregnancy and acute liver failure of
any cause. Additional detailed information is available in

October 2024

AGA Clinical Practice Update on Pregnancy-Related GI and Liver Disease 1041

recent European Association for the Study of the Liver
guidelines.21 Table 3 compares various features of intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy; hemolysis, elevated liver
enzymes, and low platelets syndrome; and AFLP.80,81

Chronic Viral Hepatitis
Best Practice Advice 12: In patients with chronic
hepatitis B virus infection, serum hepatitis B virus DNA
and liver biochemical test levels should be ordered.
Patients not on treatment but with a serum hepatitis B
virus DNA level >200,000 IU/mL during the third
trimester of pregnancy should be considered for treatment with tenofovir disoproxil fumarate.
Pregnant persons with chronic hepatitis B virus
(HBV) infection should be assessed for antiviral treatment independent of pregnancy per standard practice
guidelines.82 The risk of mother-to-child transmission of
HBV can be reduced by administration of hepatitis B
immunoglobulin and initiation of HBV vaccination to the
newborn at birth. Further reduction in the risk of
mother-to-child transmission can be achieved by identifying pregnant persons with a serum HBV DNA level

>200,000 IU/mL and initiating treatment with tenofovir
beginning in the third trimester. Treatment can be
continued until childbirth or up to 12 weeks postpartum.
Tenofovir remains the preferred treatment choice based
on its efﬁcacy and safety during pregnancy, although
there are growing data to support the use of tenofovoir
alafenamide as an alternative. Breastfeeding is not contraindicated in persons with HBV infection, whether or
not they are on antiviral therapy.83 Patients with chronic
HBV infection are at risk of HBV ﬂares postpartum and
should continue ongoing monitoring after pregnancy.84,85
Pregnant persons are advised by the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention to be screened for hepatitis C
virus infection at each pregnancy.86 The full results of
ongoing trials for treatment of hepatitis C virus during
pregnancy are awaited to guide management of hepatitis
C virus in this setting. The Infectious Diseases Society of
America and the American Association for the Study of
Liver Diseases have recommended that direct-acting
antiviral treatment may be considered during pregnancy on a case-by-case basis after a discussion of potential risks and beneﬁts.87

Table 3.Features of Intrahepatic Cholestasis of Pregnancy; Hemolysis, Elevated Liver Enzymes, and Low Platelets Syndrome;
and Acute Fatty Liver of Pregnancy
ICP

HELLP

AFLP

Frequency in pregnancies, %

0.3–0.5

0.2–0.6

0.01

Onset

Second and third trimester

Third trimester/postpartum

Third trimester/postpartum

Family history

Often

No

Occasionally

Pregnancy characteristics

Multiparity, multifetal
pregnancy

Multiparity, aged >35 y

Multifetal pregnancy, male fetus

Symptoms/clinical features

Pruritus, jaundice

Abdominal pain, vomiting,
proteinuria, headache,
peripheral edema

Abdominal pain, vomiting,
polydipsia/polyuria/hepatic
encephalopathy, liver failure,
DIC

Pre-eclampsia

No

Yes

Seen in approximately 50%

Imaging

Normal

Infarcts, hematoma, rupture,
no ascites

Fatty inﬁltration, sometimes
ascites

Laboratory evaluation

Bilirubin <5 mg/dL, elevated
ALP and GGT, increased
bile acids

Bilirubin <5 mg/dL, hemolysis,
low platelets (<100  109/
L), elevated uric acid,
±proteinuria, ALT <500 U/
L, elevated LDH

Bilirubin <5 mg/dL,
hypoglycemia, elevated
creatinine, ±proteinuria and
thrombocytopenia, elevated
ammonia, ALT<500 U/L,
prolonged PT, DIC >75%

Morbidity/mortality

Maternal: predisposed to
recurrence in subsequent
pregnancy (45%–70%)
Fetal stillbirth, fetal mortality
0.4%–1.%

Maternal: seizures, acute renal
failure, hepatic rupture,
mortality 1%–25%
Fetal mortality 11%

Maternal: acute renal failure,
mortality 7%–18%
Fetal increased mortality 9%–
23%

ALP, alkaline phosphatase; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; GGT, g-glutamyl
transpeptidase; HELLP, hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets syndrome; ICP, intrahepatic cholestasis of
pregnancy; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; PT, prothrombin time.

CLINICAL PRACTICE UPDATES

Feature

1042 Kothari et al

Immunosuppressive Therapy
Best Practice Advice 13: In patients on immunosuppressive therapy for chronic liver diseases or after
liver transplantation, therapy should be continued at
the lowest effective dose during pregnancy. Mycophenolate mofetil should not be administered during
pregnancy.
Persons on immunosuppressive therapy for chronic liver
disease or prior liver transplantation should undergo
counseling for pregnancy planning. Pregnancy is not uncommon in this population, but long-term outcomes data
are limited.88,89 Persons with chronic liver disease, such as
autoimmune hepatitis, who require immunosuppressive
therapy and who become pregnant face the risks of an
autoimmune hepatitis ﬂare (up to 30%); gestational diabetes mellitus; and adverse fetal outcomes, including higher
rates of premature birth; small for gestational age; and low
birth weight. Treatment with immunosuppressive therapy
should be continued at the lowest effective dose to reduce the
risk of adverse maternal and fetal outcomes.66–68,90 Similarly,
immunosuppressive therapy should be continued at the
lowest effective dose during pregnancy in persons who have
previously undergone liver transplantation. In the postpartum period, patients should be monitored closely for
disease ﬂare or graft rejection. Mycophenolate mofetil is
contraindicated in pregnancy because of a risk of birth defects and its use should be discontinued at least 6–12 weeks
before conception planning begins.

Conclusions
CLINICAL PRACTICE UPDATES

The evaluation and treatment of various GI disorders in
pregnancy can be challenging and require a multidisciplinary team to manage these patients during pregnancy
and the postpartum period. We have summarized approaches to various GI conditions that occur during pregnancy and that need a collaborative strategy to guide the
practicing physician. These conditions include disease states
unique to pregnancy and common GI conditions that may be
present during pregnancy. A paramount goal is to keep both
the patient and the fetus safe.

References
1. Johnson K, Posner SF, Biermann J, et al. Recommendations to improve preconception health and health
care—United States. A report of the CDC/ATSDR Preconception Care Work Group and the Select Panel on
Preconception Care. MMWR Recomm Rep 2006;55:1–23.
2. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists’
Committee on Obstetric Practice. Committee Opinion No.
656: Guidelines for Diagnostic Imaging During Pregnancy
and Lactation. Obstet Gynecol 2016;127:e75–e80.
3. California Department of Public Health. The California
Pregnancy Mortality Surveillance System (CA-PMSS).
Available at: https://www.cdph.ca.gov/Programs/CFH/
DMCAH/Pages/CA-PMSS.aspx. Accessed August 1,
2023.

Gastroenterology Vol. 167, Iss. 5
4. Obstetric Care Consensus No. 2: Levels of maternal
care. Obstet Gynecol 2015;125:502–515.
5. Tan Z, Zhang P, Zhou J, et al. Outcomes of pregnancies
complicated by cirrhosis: a retrospective cohort study.
BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 2024;24:179.
6. Mahadevan U, Robinson C, Bernasko N, et al. Inﬂammatory bowel disease in pregnancy clinical care
pathway: a report from the American Gastroenterological
Association IBD Parenthood Project Working Group.
Gastroenterology 2019;156:1508–1524.
7. Body C, Christie JA. Gastrointestinal diseases in pregnancy: nausea, vomiting, hyperemesis gravidarum,
gastroesophageal reﬂux disease, constipation, and
diarrhea. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 2016;45:267–283.
8. Ali RA, Egan LJ. Gastroesophageal reﬂux disease in
pregnancy. Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol 2007;
21:793–806.
9. Matthews A, Haas DM, O’Mathuna DP, et al. Interventions for nausea and vomiting in early pregnancy.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015;2015:CD007575.
10. Lacroix R, Eason E, Melzack R. Nausea and vomiting
during pregnancy: a prospective study of its frequency,
intensity, and patterns of change. Am J Obstet Gynecol
2000;182:931–937.
11. Fill Malfertheiner S, Seelbach-Gobel B, Costa SD, et al.
Impact of gastroesophageal reﬂux disease symptoms on
the quality of life in pregnant women: a prospective
study. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2017;29:892–896.
12. Koren G, Boskovic R, Hard M, et al. Motherisk–PUQE
(pregnancy-unique quantiﬁcation of emesis and nausea)
scoring system for nausea and vomiting of pregnancy.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 2002;186(Suppl 2):S228–S231.
13. Bischoff SC, Renzer C. Nausea and nutrition. Auton
Neurosci 2006;129:22–27.
14. Committee on Practice Bulletins-Obstetrics. ACOG
Practice Bulletin No. 189: Nausea and Vomiting of
Pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 2018;131:e15–e30.
15. Koren G, Clark S, Hankins GD, et al. Maternal safety of
the delayed-release doxylamine and pyridoxine combination for nausea and vomiting of pregnancy; a randomized placebo controlled trial. BMC Pregnancy
Childbirth 2015;15:59.
16. Li CM, Zhernakova A, Engstrand L, et al. Systematic review
with meta-analysis: the risks of proton pump inhibitors during pregnancy. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2020;51:410–420.
17. Jansen LAW, Koot MH, Van’t Hooft J, et al. The windsor
deﬁnition for hyperemesis gravidarum: a multistakeholder international consensus deﬁnition. Eur J
Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2021;266:15–22.
18. Fell DB, Dodds L, Joseph KS, et al. Risk factors for
hyperemesis gravidarum requiring hospital admission
during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 2006;107:277–284.
19. Veenendaal MV, van Abeelen AF, Painter RC, et al.
Consequences of hyperemesis gravidarum for offspring:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG 2011;
118:1302–1313.
20. Fejzo M, Rocha N, Cimino I, et al. GDF15 linked to
maternal risk of nausea and vomiting during pregnancy.
Nature 2024;625:760–767.

AGA Clinical Practice Update on Pregnancy-Related GI and Liver Disease 1043

21. European Association for the Study of the Liver. Electronic address eee, European Association for the Study
of the Liver. EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines on the
management of liver diseases in pregnancy. J Hepatol
2023;79:768–828.
22. Tan PC, Khine PP, Vallikkannu N, et al. Promethazine
compared with metoclopramide for hyperemesis gravidarum: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol
2010;115:975–981.
23. Matok I, Gorodischer R, Koren G, et al. The safety of
metoclopramide use in the ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy.
N Engl J Med 2009;360:2528–2535.
24. Pasternak B, Svanstrom H, Hviid A. Ondansetron in
pregnancy and risk of adverse fetal outcomes. N Engl J
Med 2013;368:814–823.
25. Boelig RC, Barton SJ, Saccone G, et al. Interventions for
treating hyperemesis gravidarum: a Cochrane systematic
review and meta-analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
2018;31:2492–2505.
26. Bradley CS, Kennedy CM, Turcea AM, et al. Constipation
in pregnancy: prevalence, symptoms, and risk factors.
Obstet Gynecol 2007;110:1351–1357.
27. Cullen G, O’Donoghue D. Constipation and pregnancy. Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol 2007;
21:807–818.
28. Kuronen M, Hantunen S, Alanne L, et al. Pregnancy,
puerperium and perinatal constipation - an observational
hybrid survey on pregnant and postpartum women and
their age-matched non-pregnant controls. BJOG 2021;
128:1057–1064.
29. Rao SSC, Qureshi WA, Yan Y, et al. Constipation,
hemorrhoids, and anorectal disorders in pregnancy. Am
J Gastroenterol 2022;117:16–25.
30. Bailey RL, Pac SG, Fulgoni VL 3rd, et al. Estimation of
total usual dietary intakes of pregnant women in the
United States. JAMA Netw Open 2019;2:e195967.
31. American Gastroenterological Association, Bharucha AE,
Dorn SD, et al. American Gastroenterological Association medical position statement on constipation.
Gastroenterology 2013;144:211–217.
32. Ebrahimi N, Vohra S, Gedeon C, et al. The fetal safety of
hydrocortisone-pramoxine (Proctofoam-HC) for the
treatment of hemorrhoids in late pregnancy. J Obstet
Gynaecol Can 2011;33:153–158.
33. ASGE Standard of Practice Committee, Shergill AK, BenMenachem T, et al. Guidelines for endoscopy in pregnant
and lactating women. Gastrointest Endosc 2012;76:18–24.
34. ACOG Committee Opinion No. 775: Nonobstetric Surgery During Pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 2019;
133:e285–e286.
35. Hepner DL, Siddiqui UD. Endoscopy and sedation. Am J
Gastroenterol 2022;117:33–38.
36. Kinsella SM, Lohmann G. Supine hypotensive syndrome.
Obstet Gynecol 1994;83:774–788.
37. Cornish J, Tan E, Teare J, et al. A meta-analysis on the
inﬂuence of inﬂammatory bowel disease on pregnancy.
Gut 2007;56:830–837.
38. Innocenti T, Roselli J, Taylor A, et al. Pregnancy outcomes in inﬂammatory bowel disease: data from a large
cohort survey. J Dig Dis 2022;23:473–481.

39. Tavernier N, Fumery M, Peyrin-Biroulet L, et al. Systematic review: fertility in non-surgically treated inﬂammatory bowel disease. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2013;
38:847–853.
40. Mahadevan U, Martin CF, Sandler RS, et al. 865 PIANO:
a 1000 patient prospective registry of pregnancy outcomes in women with IBD exposed to immunomodulators and biologic therapy. Gastroenterology 2012;142:S149.
41. Shmidt E, Dubinsky MC. Inﬂammatory bowel disease
and pregnancy. Am J Gastroenterol 2022;117:60–68.
42. Kammerlander H, Nielsen J, Kjeldsen J, et al. Fecal calprotectin during pregnancy in women with moderatesevere inﬂammatory bowel disease. Inﬂamm Bowel Dis
2018;24:839–848.
43. De Voogd F, Joshi H, Van Wassenaer E, et al. Intestinal
ultrasound to evaluate treatment response during pregnancy in patients with inﬂammatory bowel disease.
Inﬂamm Bowel Dis 2022;28:1045–1052.
44. Rahimi R, Nikfar S, Rezaie A, et al. Pregnancy outcome in
women with inﬂammatory bowel disease following
exposure to 5-aminosalicylic acid drugs: a meta-analysis. Reprod Toxicol 2008;25:271–275.
45. Jharap B, de Boer NK, Stokkers P, et al. Intrauterine
exposure and pharmacology of conventional thiopurine
therapy in pregnant patients with inﬂammatory bowel
disease. Gut 2014;63:451–457.
46. Dubinsky M, Abraham B, Mahadevan U. Management of
the pregnant IBD patient. Inﬂamm Bowel Dis 2008;
14:1736–1750.
47. Lichtenstein GR, Feagan BG, Cohen RD, et al. Serious
infection and mortality in patients with Crohn’s disease:
more than 5 years of follow-up in the TREAT registry. Am
J Gastroenterol 2012;107:1409–1422.
48. Nielsen OH, Gubatan JM, Juhl CB, et al. Biologics for
inﬂammatory bowel disease and their safety in pregnancy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2022;20:74–87.e3.
49. Hviid A, Molgaard-Nielsen D. Corticosteroid use during
pregnancy and risk of orofacial clefts. CMAJ 2011;
183:796–804.
50. Gur C, Diav-Citrin O, Shechtman S, et al. Pregnancy
outcome after ﬁrst trimester exposure to corticosteroids:
a prospective controlled study. Reprod Toxicol 2004;
18:93–101.
51. McConnell RA, Mahadevan U. Pregnancy and the patient
with inﬂammatory bowel disease: fertility, treatment,
delivery, and complications. Gastroenterol Clin North Am
2016;45:285–301.
52. Luthra AK, Patel KP, Li F, et al. Endoscopic intervention
and cholecystectomy in pregnant women with acute
biliary pancreatitis decrease early readmissions. Gastrointest Endosc 2019;89:1169–1177.e10.
53. Tang SJ, Mayo MJ, Rodriguez-Frias E, et al. Safety and
utility of ERCP during pregnancy. Gastrointest Endosc
2009;69:453–461.
54. Inamdar S, Berzin TM, Sejpal DV, et al. Pregnancy is a
risk factor for pancreatitis after endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopancreatography in a national cohort study.
Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2016;14:107–114.

CLINICAL PRACTICE UPDATES

October 2024

1044 Kothari et al

CLINICAL PRACTICE UPDATES

55. American Association of Physicists in Medicine. PS 8-A:
AAPM position statement on the use of patient gonadal
and fetal shielding. Available at: https://www.aapm.org/org/
policies/details.asp?id¼2552. Accessed June 28, 2024.
56. Sethi A, Banerjee S, Chahal P. Advanced endoscopic
procedures in pregnancy. Am J Gastroenterol 2022;
117:39–43.
57. Hedstrom J, Nilsson J, Andersson R, et al. Changing
management of gallstone-related disease in pregnancy a retrospective cohort analysis. Scand J Gastroenterol
2017;52:1016–1021.
58. Ilhan M, Ilhan G, Gok AFK, et al. The course and outcomes of complicated gallstone disease in pregnancy:
experience of a tertiary center. Turk J Obstet Gynecol
2016;13:178–182.
59. de Bari O, Wang TY, Liu M, et al. Cholesterol cholelithiasis in pregnant women: pathogenesis, prevention and
treatment. Ann Hepatol 2014;13:728–745.
60. Othman MO, Stone E, Hashimi M, et al. Conservative
management of cholelithiasis and its complications in
pregnancy is associated with recurrent symptoms and
more emergency department visits. Gastrointest Endosc
2012;76:564–569.
61. Jelin EB, Smink DS, Vernon AH, et al. Management of
biliary tract disease during pregnancy: a decision analysis. Surg Endosc 2008;22:54–60.
62. Juo YY, Khrucharoen U, Sanaiha Y, et al. Cumulative
ﬁnancial burden of readmissions for biliary pancreatitis
in pregnant women. Obstet Gynecol 2018;
132:415–422.
63. Caliskan K. The use of percutaneous cholecystostomy in
the treatment of acute cholecystitis during pregnancy.
Clin Exp Obstet Gynecol 2017;44:11–13.
64. Lightner AL, Mathis KL. Surgery in pregnancy. Am J
Gastroenterol 2022;117:53–59.
65. Pearl JP, Price RR, Tonkin AE, et al. SAGES guidelines
for the use of laparoscopy during pregnancy. Surg
Endosc 2017;31:3767–3782.
66. Sarkar M, Brady CW, Fleckenstein J, et al. Reproductive
health and liver disease: practice guidance by the
American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.
Hepatology 2021;73:318–365.
67. Terrault NA, Williamson C. Pregnancy-associated liver
diseases. Gastroenterology 2022;163:97–117.e1.
68. Brady CW. Liver disease in pregnancy: what’s new.
Hepatol Commun 2020;4:145–156.
69. Ovadia C, Seed PT, Sklavounos A, et al. Association of
adverse perinatal outcomes of intrahepatic cholestasis of
pregnancy with biochemical markers: results of aggregate and individual patient data meta-analyses. Lancet
2019;393:899–909.
70. Chappell LC, Bell JL, Smith A, et al. Ursodeoxycholic
acid versus placebo in women with intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (PITCHES): a randomised controlled
trial. Lancet 2019;394:849–860.
71. Ovadia C, Sajous J, Seed PT, et al. Ursodeoxycholic acid
in intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy: a systematic

Gastroenterology Vol. 167, Iss. 5
review and individual participant data meta-analysis.
Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol 2021;6:547–558.
72. ACOG Committee Opinion No. 764: Medically indicated
late-preterm and early-term deliveries. Obstet Gynecol
2019;133:e151–e155.
73. Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (SMFM), Lee RH,
Greenberg M, et al. Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine
Consult Series #53: Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy: replaces Consult #13, April 2011. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 2021;224:B2–B9.
74. Kushner T, Tholey D, Dodge J, et al. Outcomes of liver
transplantation for acute fatty liver disease of pregnancy.
Am J Transplant 2019;19:2101–2107.
75. Roberge S, Nicolaides K, Demers S, et al. The role of
aspirin dose on the prevention of preeclampsia and fetal
growth restriction: systematic review and meta-analysis.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 2017;216:110–120.e6.
76. Meher S, Duley L, Hunter K, et al. Antiplatelet therapy
before or after 16 weeks’ gestation for preventing preeclampsia: an individual participant data meta-analysis.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 2017;216:121–128.e2.
77. ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 202. Gestational hypertension and preeclampsia. Obstet Gynecol 2019;133:1.
78. Ch’ng CL, Morgan M, Hainsworth I, et al. Prospective
study of liver dysfunction in pregnancy in Southwest
Wales. Gut 2002;51:876–880.
79. Goel A, Ramakrishna B, Zachariah U, et al. How accurate
are the Swansea criteria to diagnose acute fatty liver of
pregnancy in predicting hepatic microvesicular steatosis? Gut 2011;60:138–139; author reply 139–140.
80. Hay JE. Liver disease in pregnancy. Hepatology 2008;
47:1067–1076.
81. Ko H, Yoshida EM. Acute fatty liver of pregnancy. Can J
Gastroenterol 2006;20:25–30.
82. Valentin N, Guerrido I, Rozenshteyn F, et al. Pregnancy
outcomes after liver transplantation: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Am J Gastroenterol 2021;
116:491–504.
83. Chen X, Chen J, Wen J, et al. Breastfeeding is not a risk
factor for mother-to-child transmission of hepatitis B virus. PLoS One 2013;8:e55303.
84. Yi W, Pan CQ, Li MH, et al. The characteristics and
predictors of postpartum hepatitis ﬂares in women with
chronic hepatitis B. Am J Gastroenterol 2018;
113:686–693.
85. Liu J, Wang J, Jin D, et al. Hepatic ﬂare after telbivudine
withdrawal and efﬁcacy of postpartum antiviral therapy
for pregnancies with chronic hepatitis B virus.
J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2017;32:177–183.
86. Schillie S, Wester C, Osborne M, et al. CDC recommendations for hepatitis C screening among adults - United
States, 2020. MMWR Recomm Rep 2020;69:1–17.
87. Bhattacharya D, Aronsohn A, Price J, et al. Hepatitis C
guidance 2023 update: American Association for the
Study of Liver Diseases–Infectious Diseases Society of
America recommendations for testing, managing, and
treating hepatitis C virus infection. Clin Infect Dis 2023;

AGA Clinical Practice Update on Pregnancy-Related GI and Liver Disease 1045

ciad319. Published online May 25, 2023. https://doi.org/
10.1093/cid/ciad319.
88. Akiyama S, Hamdeh S, Murakami N, et al. Pregnancy
and neonatal outcomes in women receiving calcineurin
inhibitors: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J
Clin Pharmacol 2022;88:3950–3961.
89. Kanis SL, de Lima-Karagiannis A, de Boer NKH,
et al. Use of thiopurines during conception and
pregnancy is not associated with adverse pregnancy
outcomes or health of infants at one year in a prospective study. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2017;
15:1232–1241.e1.
90. Kallapur A, Jang C, Yin O, et al. Pregnancy care in solid
organ transplant recipients. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2022;
157:502–513.

Received December 13, 2023. Accepted June 20, 2024.
Correspondence
Address correspondence to: Shivangi Kothari, MD, Division of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Rochester Medical Center,
601 Elmwood Avenue, Rochester, New York 14642. e-mail:
shivangi_kothari@urmc.rochester.edu.
Author Contributions
All authors wrote the paper and critically reviewed the manuscript.
Conﬂicts of interest
The authors disclose the following: Shivangi Kothari served as a consultant for
Boston Scientiﬁc and Olympus Medical and is the co-editor of the American
College of Gastroenterology pregnancy monograph. Yalda Afshar served as
a consultant for Mirvie and Bio-Rad and has conducted investigator-initiated
research with Natera. Lawrence Friedman receives ﬁnancial support from
Newton-Wellesley Hospital and receives royalties from Elsevier, McGraw-Hill,
and Wiley. Joseph Ahn has served as a consultant for Gilead Sciences.

CLINICAL PRACTICE UPDATES

October 2024

